## Conclusion: On Contemporary Alienation or the End of the Pact with the Devil ## The Student of Prague The Student of Prague is an old silent film from the 1930s, an expressionist film of the German school. 121 It tells the story of a poor but ambitious student impatient for a more prosperous life. As he is taking part in a drinking bout in a café near Prague, a hunt is in progress all around in which that city's high society is finding what amusement it can. Someone rules over that society and is pulling the strings. He can be seen manoeuvring the animals at will and regulating the movements of the hunters. And this man of relatively advanced years, with his top hat, gloves, knobbed stick, slight paunch and little turn-of-the-century goatee beard, looks like one of the hunters. He is the Devil. He contrives to have one of the women from the hunt lose her way. She meets the student -- love at first sight! But the woman, being rich, is beyond his grasp. Returning home, the student broods on his ambition and dissatisfaction, which have now assumed a sexual dimension. The Devil then appears in the student's seedy room, which contains only books and a life-size mirror. In exchange for his image in the mirror, he offers him a pile of gold. The deal is struck. The Devil peels the specular image from the mirror as though it were an etching or a sheet of carbon paper, rolls it up, puts it in his pocket, and leaves, in suitably obsequious and sardonic fashion. Here the film's real argument begins. Thanks to his money, the student enjoys success after success, avoiding, with cat-like tread, the mirrors with which the fashionable society in which he moves unfortunately surrounds itself. At the beginning, however he retains his peace of mind; he is not greatly vexed at no longer seeing his own image. But then, one day, he sees his own flesh-and-blood image. This double, which now frequents the same circles and clearly takes an interest in him, follows him around and never lets him rest. It is, we surmise, his own image -- the image he sold -- which the Devil has revived and put back into circulation. As the good image it is, it remains attached to its model; but, as the bad image it has become, it now accompanies him not only when he chances to pass by mirrors, but in life itself, wherever he goes. He runs the risk of being compromised by it at any moment, if the two are seen together (a number of small incidents of this kind have already occurred). And if he flees society to avoid it, it takes his place and completes what he had begun, distorting his actions to the point of rendering them criminal. One day when he has provoked a duel, but has resolved to make his excuses on the duelling ground, he arrives at the appointed place at dawn. But he is too late: his double has passed that way before him and the opponent is already dead. The student hides His image continues to hound him, as though to be avenged for having been sold. He sees the image everywhere. It appears to him behind tombs, or at the edge of the cemetery. He is no longer able to have any social life; his existence is impossible. In this despairing state, he rejects even a sincere offer of love and, to put an end to all his troubles, settles on the plan of killing his own image. One day, the image pursues him into his room. In the course of a violent scene between the two, it happens to pass in front of the mirror from which it came. At the memory of this initial scene, nostalgia for his image, mingled with fury at what he is enduring on its account, pushes the student to the brink. He fires at it. Naturally, the mirror is smashed and the double, become again the phantasm it once was, vanishes into thin air. But at the same moment, the student slumps to the ground; it is he who is dying. For, by killing his image, he is killing himself, since, without his noticing it, the image has become living and real in his stead. In his death throes, however, he grasps at one of the fragments of the mirror scattered about the floor and realizes that he can see himself again. He loses his body, but, by paying that price, his normal likeness is restored to him just before he dies. The mirror image here symbolically represents the meaning of our acts. These build up around us a world that is in our image. The transparency of our relation to the world is expressed rather well by the individual's unimpaired relation to his image in a mirror: the faithfulness of that reflection bears witness, to some degree, to a real reciprocity between the world and ourselves. Symbolically, then, if that image should be missing, it is the sign that the world is becoming opaque, that our acts are getting out of our control and, at that point, we have no perspective on ourselves. Without that guarantee, no identity is possible any longer: I become another to myself; I am alienated. This is the first element, then, which the film presents. But it is not content merely to tell a general tale. It immediately supplies the concrete meaning of the situation. The image is not lost or abolished by chance: it is sold. It falls into the commodity sphere, we might say, and this is indeed the sense of concrete, social alienation. At the same time, the fact that the Devil can pocket this image as an object is also the fantastic illustration of the real process of commodity fetishism: from the moment they are produced, our works and our acts fall out of our grasp and are objectivized; they fall, literally, into the Devil's hands. Thus, in Chamisso's Peter Schlemihl the shadow too is separated from the person maleficently and becomes a pure thing, an article of apparel one might leave at home if one were not careful and which could get stuck to the ground if there were too sharp a frost. Schlemihl, who has lost his shadow, fancies he might have one drawn for him by a painter -- one which will follow him about. And Egyptian legends say that one should not walk too close to water, since crocodiles have a taste for passing shadows. The plots of the two tales are equivalent: whether we are speaking of image or shadow, it is in each case the transparency of our relation to ourselves and to the world that is shattered, and life then loses its meaning. But there is one thing in the fables of Schlemihl and The Student of Prague that is superior to many other pacts with the Devil: the fact that they put Gold, and Gold alone -- that is to say, commodity logic and exchange-value -- at the centre of alienation. The two fables do, however, proceed in quite different ways after that, with the logic of the Schlemihl story -- in which Chamisso does not carry through the consequences of the shadow being transformed into an object -- lacking rigour. Chamisso fills out his tale with fantastical, comic episodes, like the chase over the \`sunlit sandy plain' after a wandering, masterless shadow, which might be his, or when the Devil gives him back his shadow to try out again for a few hours. But Schlemihl does not suffer directly from his alienated shadow; he suffers only the social reprobation which attaches to the absence of a shadow. Once it has escaped, it does not turn against him to become the instrument which destroys his very being. Schlemihl is condemned to solitude, but he remains the same. Neither his consciousness nor his life is taken from him, only life in society. Hence the final compromise, in which he stoically rejects the second bargain proposed by, the Devil, which would give him back his shadow in exchange for his soul. Thus, he loses his shadow, but he saves his soul. The Student of Prague follows a much tighter logic. As soon as he has sold his image or, in other words, has sold a part of himself, the student is hounded to his death by it in real life. This translates the unvarnished truth of the process of alienation: nothing of what is alienated runs off into some neutral circuit, into an \`external world' over against which we might be said to remain free -- suffering, with each dispossession, only a loss in our having, but always retaining possession of ourselves in our \`private' sphere and ultimately remaining intact in our being. This is the reassuring fiction of the \`inner self' or \`heart of hearts' [for intérieur], where the soul is free of the world. Alienation goes much deeper than that. There is a part of us which gets away from us in this process, but we do not get away from it. The object (the soul, the shadow, the product of our labour become object) takes its revenge. All we are dispossessed of remains We encounter the troubling atmosphere of this inversion of subject and object, this sorcery of the otherness of the same, in the most everyday expressions: \`He followed him about like a shadow. And also in our cult of the dead -- a propitiating of a part of us which is alienated once and for all, and from which, as a consequence, we can expect only ill. Now, there is a part of ourselves by which, when living, we are collectively haunted: social labour power, which, once sold, returns, through the whole social cycle of the commodity, to dispossess us of the meaning of labour itself; labour power which has become -- by a social, not a diabolical, operation, of course -- the materialized obstacle to the fruits of our labours. It is all this which is symbolized in The Student of Prague by the sudden emergence, live and hostile, of the image, and by the long suicide (for such we must call it) which that image imposes on the one who sold it. What is crucial here, and is dramatically demonstrated to us, is that the alienated human being is not merely a being diminished and impoverished but left intact in its essence: it is a being turned inside out, changed into something evil, into its own enemy, set against itself. This is, on another level, the process Freud describes in repression: the repressed returning through the agency of repression itself. It is the body of Christ on the cross changing into a woman to obsess the monk who has taken a vow of chastity. In alienation, it is the human being's objectivized life-forces which at any moment change into him to his cost, and thus drive him to his death. In the end, Schlemihl gives relative meaning to his life and dies a natural death, like a solitary American industrialist, in a charitable institution he himself founded in the days when he was wealthy. He saved his soul by rejecting the second bargain. This division of the action flows necessarily from the ambiguity of the initial idea and, as a result, the fable entirely loses its rigour. In The Student of Prague, there is no second bargain. The student dies inexorably from the logical consequences of the first. This means that, for Chamisso, it is possible to sell one's shadow -- that is to say, to be alienated in all respects of one's behaviour -- and still to save one's soul. Alienation leads only to a conflict in social appearances, and, that being the case, Schlemihl can very easily overcome it abstractly in solitude, whereas The Student of Prague develops the objective logic of alienation in all its rigour and shows that there is no way out but death. Every ideal solution for overcoming alienation is cut off. Alienation cannot be overcome: it is the very structure of the bargain with the Devil. It is the very structure of market society. ## The End of Transcendence The Student of Prague is a remarkable illustration of the processes of alienation, that is to say, of the generalized pattern of individual and domination of Nature, that process being always simultaneously a process of the taming of sexuality. Among the forces of evil, indexed to the Devil, the Western \`Sorcerer's Apprentice' has served constantly to thematize the immense guilt attaching to the puritanical, Promethean enterprise of Progress, of sublimation and labour, of rationality and efficiency That is why this medieval theme of the re-emergence of the repressed -- of being haunted by the repressed and selling one's soul (the \`pact' reflecting the irruption of market processes into early bourgeois society) -- was revived by the romantics in the very earliest years of the \`industrial age'. Since then, the theme has continued to run (parallel to the myth of the \`miracle of technology') beneath the myth of the inevitability of technology. All our current science fiction is steeped in it, as is the whole of everyday mythology, from the peril of the atomic catastrophe (the technological suicide of civilization) to the theme, played out in a thousand variations, of the fatal gap between technical Progress and human social morality. We may, therefore, suggest that the age of consumption, being the historical culmination of the whole process of accelerated productivity under the sign of capital, is also the age of radical alienation. Commodity logic has become generalized and today governs not only labour processes and material products, but the whole of culture, sexuality, and human relations, including even fantasies and individual drives. Everything is taken over by that logic, not only in the sense that all functions and needs are objectivized and manipulated in terms of profit, but in the deeper sense in which everything is spectacularized or, in other words, evoked, provoked and orchestrated into images, signs, consumable models. But the question then is: in so far as it revolves around the alterity of the selfsame (that is to say, around an alienated, abducted, essence of man), can this schema (or this concept) of alienation still be operative in a context in which the individual is no longer ever confronted with his own split image? The myth of the Pact and the Sorcerer's Apprentice is still a demiurgic myth, the myth of the Market, Gold and Production, the transcendent objective of which turns around against human beings themselves. By contrast, consumption is not Promethean; it is hedonistic and regressive. Its process is no longer one of labour and self-surpassing, but a process of absorption of signs and absorption by signs. It is, therefore, characterized, as Marcuse says, by the end of transcendence. In the generalized process of consumption, there is no longer any soul, no shadow, no double, and no image in the specular sense. There is no longer any contradiction within being, or any problematic of being and appearance. There is no longer anything but the transmission and reception of signs, and the individual being vanishes in this combinatory and calculus of signs. Consumer man never comes face to face with his own needs, any more than with the specific product of his labour; nor is he ever confronted with his own image: he is immanent in the signs he arranges. There is no transcendence any more, no finality, no objective: what characterizes this society is the absence of \`reflection', of a perspective on itself. There is, therefore, no maleficent agency either, like that of the Devil, with whom one could enter into a Faustian pact to gain wealth and glory, since one is given these things by a beneficent, maternal ambience -- the affluent society itself. Or, alternatively, we must suppose that it is society as a whole, as a société anonyme, as a thing of \`limited liability', which has struck a contract with the Devil, has bartered all transcendence and finality for affluence, and is now haunted by an absence of ends. In the specific mode of consumption, there is no transcendence any more, not even the fetishistic transcendence of the commodity. There is now only immanence in the order of signs. Just as there is no agonizing ontological struggle, but a logical relation between the signifier and the signified, so there is no longer an ontological struggle between the being and its double (its shadow, its soul, its ideal), whether divine or diabolic; there is logical calculation of signs and absorption into the system of signs. There is no longer any mirror or looking-glass in the modern order in which the human being would be confronted with his image for better or for worse; there is only the shop-window -- the site of consumption, in which the individual no longer produces his own reflection, but is absorbed in the contemplation of multiple signs/objects, is absorbed into the order of signifiers of social status, etc. He is not reflected in that order, but absorbed and abolished. The subject of consumption is the order of signs. Whether we define this latter structurally, as the instance of a code, or empirically as the generalized ambience of objects, the involvement of the subject is no longer, at any event, that of an \`alienated' essence in the philosophical, Marxist sense of the term. It is not that of an essence which is dispossessed, taken over by some alienating agency and become foreign to itself. For there is no longer, properly speaking, any \`selfsame', any \`subject itself', or, therefore, any \`alterity of the selfsame', and therefore no alienation in the strict sense. The situation is rather like that of the child kissing his image in the mirror before going to bed: he doesn't entirely mistake the image for himself, since he has already \`recognized' it. Nor is it an alien double in which he is. reflected: he plays with it, somewhere between sameness and otherness. So it is with the consumer: he \`plays out' his personalization between one term and another, one sign and another. Between signs there is no contradiction, just as there is no exclusive opposition between the child and his image: there is collusion and ordered involvement. The consumer defines himself by his choice within a \`game' played between different models or, in other words, by his combinatorial involvement in that game. It is in this sense that consumption is ludic and that the ludic dimension of consumption has gradually supplanted the tragic dimension of identity. ## From Spectre to Spectrum We have today no myth equal to that of the Pact with the Devil or the Sorcerer's Apprentice (which thematized the fatal contradiction between the individual being and his Double) to thematize the peaceful coexistence -- in the guise of a paradigmatic declension -- of the successive terms which define the \`personal' model. Tragic duality (which the situationists are again restoring in the concept of the \`spectacle', the \`society of the spectacle', and radical alienation) had its great myths, all of them linked to the notion of a human essence and the inevitability of losing it -- linked to Being and its spectre. But the ludic ramification of the person into a spectrum of signs and objects, nuances and differences, which constitutes the basis of the consumption process and totally redefines the individual not as alienated substance but as shifting difference -- this novel process, which is not analysable in terms of the person (what an admirable amphibology we have in the French word personne which, on its own, means \`no one'!) and the alterity of the person, has not found an equivalent myth to embody the Metaphysics of Consumption -- a metaphysical myth to represent what the Double and Alienation represented for the order of production. This is no accident. Myths, like the faculties of speech, reflection and transcription, are indissociable from transcendence, and disappear with it. ## Consumption of Consumption If the consumer society no longer produces myth, this is because it is itself its own myth. The Devil, who brought Gold and Wealth (the price of which was our soul), has been supplanted by Affluence pure and simple. And the pact with the Devil has been supplanted by the contract of Affluence. Moreover, just as the most diabolical aspect of the Devil has never been his existing, but his making us believe that he exists, so Affluence does not exist, but it only has to make us believe it exists to be an effective myth. Consumption is a myth. That is to say, it is a statement of contemporary society about itself, the way our society speaks itself. And, in a sense, the only objective reality of consumption is the idea of consumption; it is this reflexive, discursive configuration, endlessly repeated in everyday speech and intellectual discourse, which has acquired the force of common sense. Our society thinks itself and speaks itself as a consumer society. As much as it consumes anything, it consumes itself as consumer society, as idea. Advertising is the triumphal paean to that idea. This is not a supplementary dimension; it is a fundamental one, for it is the dimension of myth. If we did nothing but consume (getting, devouring, digesting), consumption would not be a myth, which is to say that it would not be a full, self-fulfilling discourse of society about itself, a general system of interpretation, a mirror in which it takes supreme delight in itself, a utopia in which it is reflected in advance. In this sense, affluence and consumption -- again, we mean not the consumption of material goods, products and services, but the consumed image of consumption -- do, indeed, constitute our new tribal mythology -- the morality of modernity. Without that anticipation and reflexive potentialization of enjoyment in the \`collective consciousness', consumption would merely be what it is and would not be such a force for social integration. It would merely be a richer, more lavish, more differentiated mode of subsistence than before, but it would no more have a name than ever it did before, when nothing designated as collective value, as reference myth what was merely a mode of survival (eating, drinking, housing and clothing oneself) or the sumptuary expenditure (finery, great houses, jewels) of the privileged classes. Neither eating roots nor throwing feasts was given the name \`consuming'. Our age is the first in which current expenditure on food and \`prestige' expenditure have both been termed consumption by everyone concerned, there being a total consensus on the matter. The historic emergence of the myth of consumption in the twentieth century is radically different from the emergence of the technical concept in economic thinking or science, where it was employed much earlier. That terminological systematization for everyday use changes history itself: it is the sign of a new social reality. Strictly speaking, there has been consumption only since the term has \`passed into general usage'. Though it is mystifying and analytically useless -- a veritable anticoncept' indeed -- it signifies, nonetheless, that an ideological restructuring of values has occurred. The fact that this society experiences itself as a consumer society must be the starting point for an objective analysis. When we say that this \`affluent' society is its own myth, we mean that it takes over, at a general level, that admirable advertising slogan which might happily serve as its motto: the body you dream of is your own. A kind of immense collective narcissism is inducing society to merge itself into -- and absolve itself in -- the image it presents of itself, to be convinced of itself in the way that advertising ends up convincing people of their bodies and the prestige values of those bodies. In short, it is becoming its own \`self-fulfilling prophecy'. 122 Boorstin has shown how this immense process of self-demonstrative tautology works in the USA, where a whole society speaks which the great Delphic Oracle of Public Opinion is made to speak and to rave: they foretell social and political events and substitute themselves, like identikit pictures, for the real events, which end up reflecting them. Hence, as Boorstin writes, \`public opinion -- once the public's expression -- becomes more and more an image into which the public fits its expression. Public opinion becomes filled with what is already there. It is the people looking in the mirror.' 123 So it is too with celebrities, stars and \`heroes of consumption': The hero stood for outside standards. The celebrity is a tautology ... Celebrities are known primarily for their well-knownness. Yet the celebrity is usually nothing greater than a more publicized version of us. In imitating him, in trying to dress like him, talk like him, look like him, think like him, we are simply imitating ourselves ... By imitating a tautology, we ourselves become a tautology standing for what we stand for ... We look for models, and we see our own image. 124 And of television, Boorstin remarks: \`At home we begin to try to live according to the script of television programmes of happy families, which are themselves nothing but amusing quintessences of us. 125 Like every great myth worth its salt, the myth of \`Consumption' has its discourse and its antidiscourse. In other words, the elated discourse on affluence is everywhere shadowed by a morose, moralizing, \`critical' counter-discourse on the ravages of consumer society and the tragic end to which it inevitably dooms society as a whole. That counter-discourse is to be heard everywhere. Not only is it found in intellectualist discourse, which is always ready to distance itself by its scorn for \`simpleminded \`values' and \`material satisfactions', but it is now present within \`mass culture' itself: advertising increasingly parodies itself, integrating counteradvertising into its promotional technique. France-Soir, Paris-Match, the radio, the TV, and ministerial speeches all contain as an obligatory refrain the lament on this \`consumer society', where values, ideals and ideologies are giving way to the pleasures of everyday life. We shall not soon forget Chaban-Delmas's famous flight of oratory: \`We have to control consumer society by giving it back some soul!' This endlessly repeated indictment is part of the game: it is the critical mirage, the anti-fable which rounds off the fable -- the discourse of consumption and its critical undermining. Only the two sides taken together constitute the myth. We have, therefore, to allot to the \`critical discourse and the moralizing protest their true responsibility for the elaboration of the myth. It is that discourse which locks us definitively into the mythic and prophetic teleology of the \`Civilization of the Object'. It is that discourse which, being itself much more fascinated by the Object than either common sense or the grassroots consumer, transfigures it into a mythic and fascinated anti-object critique. The rebels of May 1968 did not escape this trap of reifying objects and consumption excessively by according them diabolical value, of denouncing them as such and building them up into a determining instance. And the real  work of myth-making lies here. If all the denunciations, all the disquisitions on \`alienation', and all the derisive force of pop and anti-art play so easily into establishment hands, that is because they are themselves part of the myth, which they round out by providing the counter-melody within the formal liturgy of the Object we spoke of at the beginning -- and do so in a manner that is without doubt more perverse than the spontaneous adherence to consumer values. In conclusion, we shall say that this counter-discourse, which establishes no real distance, is as immanent in consumer society as any of its other aspects. This negative discourse is the intellectual's second home. Just as medieval society was balanced on God and the Devil, so ours is balanced on consumption and its denunciation. Though at least around the Devil heresies and black magic sects could organize. Our magic is white. No heresy is possible any longer in a state of affluence. It is the prophylactic whiteness of a saturated society, a society with no history and no dizzying heights, a society with no other myth than itself. But here we are once again speaking in morose, prophetic terms, caught in the trap of the Object and its apparent plenitude. Now, we know that the Object is nothing and that behind it stands the tangled void of human relations, the negative imprint of the immense mobilization of productive and social forces which have become reified in it. We shall await the violent irruptions and sudden disintegrations which will come, just as unforeseeably and as certainly as May 1968, to wreck this white Mass. ## Notes 1 The other major possibility would be Michel Foucault, but he is perhaps better [return] thought of as a poststructuralist than as a postmodernist. Baudrillard eschews the poststructural label and Foucault abhorred all attempts to label him. 2 I am using this term to mean those who take sociological theory as a subject of study [return] (Ritzer, 1991). 3 There are a few exceptions; a few things that do date the book. Examples include the [return] discussion of a now-forgotten 1960s radio quiz show, Brigitte Bardot as a paradigm of female beauty, and the hippies and their rejection of modern consumer society. 4 He had dealt with it in greater detail in his previous book, The System of Objects [return] (1968/1996). He also dealt with consumption, both directly and indirectly, in this earlier work, but in nothing like the detail in which it was to be analysed in The Consumer Society. 5 Two exceptions are Expressing America: A Critique of the Global Credit Card Society [return] (Ritzer, 1995) and Credit Card Nation: America's Dangerous Addiction to Consumer Debt (Manning and Williams, 1996). 6 Although his name is rarely mentioned, I think the most powerful presence is [return] Ferdinand de Saussure and the structuralism and structural linguistics he played such a central role in creating. 7 Fredric Jameson (1991) is one postmodernist who is often accused of this. [return] 8 Consumption is also described as a system of communication, but while this idea [return] too can be traced to Durkheim, it is better associated with other theoretical inputs into his work (see later). 9 Of course, there are those who see a great deal of functional thinking in Marx's work [return] (e. g. Cohen, 1978/1986). 10 While he is doing functional analyses, there is no clear indication that Baudrillard [return] had read Merton (1968) and his work on the functional paradigm. 11 Other pathologies dealt with by Baudrillard are a series of environmental \`nuisances' [return] (air, water and noise pollution), cultural \`nuisances' (like grim housing developments, planned obsolescence, insecure employment), as well as poverty. 12 There is, of course, a Marxian strand of structuralism (Althusser, Poulantzas, etc.). [return] 13 To this he adds a more sociological analysis of social differentiation and stratification. [return] And this has both a lived and a structural aspect. As a result of the latter, people are permanently controlled by a code that they are, in the main, unable to fathom. 14 In Chapter 4, note 1, Baudrillard seems to acknowledge that there is a difference [return] between a modern (presumably including modern sociology) and a structural approach to inequality. 15 Using a more sociological approach, Baudrillard also argues that the lower classes [return] engage in consumption in an effort to compensate for their lack of upward mobility. 16 The key here is the notion of \`social logic' which Baudrillard clearly intends in a [return] structural sense, but also associates with a sociological approach. 17 Baudrillard also critiques psycho-sociologists for being part of the service sector and [return] for being interested in solving social problems by being therapists involved in dealing with communication problems. 18 At this stage in his work, Baudrillard never discusses postmodern society. While the [return] term \`postmodern' had some early precursors, and C. Wright Mills had used it as early as 1959, it was not to begin to be used widely until the 1970s. 19 To take another example, he contends that desire is the truth of the body, implying [return] that the body's modern sexuality or eroticism is false. 20 The body had come under Foucault's scrutiny in the Birth of the Clinic (1963/1975), [return] but sexuality was not to become a focal concern until The History of Sexuality (1978/1980). 21 This is one of the many places in this work where Baudrillard remains locked in a [return] Marxian perspective, causing him, among other things, to make a series of analogies between consumption and production. This is one of the key areas in which it is abundantly clear that Marxian theory is at least as much of a hindrance as it is a help to Baudrillard. It is this kind of tension that sets the stage for Baudrillard's later abandonment of a Marxian perspective. 22 Although Baudrillard does not explicitly make the point, desire would predominate [return] in a society characterized by symbolic exchange. 23 The implication, once again, is that art in primitive society, in symbolic exchange, [return] would play such a contradictory role. 24 In fact, Marx (1981: 471) used the term \`means of consumption' and distinguished it [return] from \`means of production'. The former are commodities that enter individual consumption (as necessities or luxuries), while the latter enter productive consumption. However, Marx is not using \`means of consumption' as it is employed by Baudrillard and here to mean structures that serve to make consumption possible. They are to Marx consumer goods used by the proletariat (means of subsistence) and the capitalist (luxuries). 25 Although they can be seen as signs themselves (McDonald's, Burger King and [return] Wendy's are part of the sign system that is the fast-food industry) as well as settings which permit people to consume signs. 26 Credit cards might better be seen as \`meta-means of consumption', facilitating the [return] use of means of consumption such as shopping malls and ski resorts. 27 Although it is a simulated fantasy world since truly meaningful dreamwork is in [return] Baudrillard's view no longer possible. Yet again, the presumption is that truly meaningful dreamwork is only possible in primitive societies and/or those characterized by symbolic exchange. 28 Obviously, this author is dubious about Baudrillard's belief that he avoided falling [return] into the trap that ensnared Galbraith and others. 29 It is interesting to note that Baudrillard (1968/1996: 54) had earlier noted his [return] resistance to the idea of romanticizing the past. 30 Baudrillard (1976/1993; 1983/1990; 1990/1993) is later more explicit about this [return] historical model and takes it further. 1 K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, Lawrence and Wishart, [return] London, 1971, p. 87. 2 Contrary to a rather odd assertion in Mark Poster's book Jean Baudrillard: Selected [return] Writings (Polity, 1988, p. 55, note 4), Flaine is not \`Baudrillard's parody of suburban communities around Paris' but a genuine ski resort in Haute-Savoie (Tr.). 1 This situation is almost ideally realized by a city like Berlin. Moreover, almost all [return] science-fiction novels have as their theme the situation of a rational and \`affluent' Great City threatened with destruction from without or within by some great hostile force. 1 Tables appearing in the original French have been removed at the author's request [return] (Tr.). 2 J.K. Galbraith, The Affluent Society, Penguin in association with Hamish Hamilton, [return] Harmondsworth, 1962, p. 210. 3 There is in this sense an absolute difference between waste in our \`affluent societies', [return] a waste that is a nuisance integrated into the economic system, which is a functional wastage not productive of collective value, and the destructive prodigality engaged in by all the so-called \`societies of scarcity' in their festivals and sacrifices, this latter being waste \`by excess', in which the destruction of goods was a source of collective symbolic values. Breaking up old cars that have gone out of fashion or burning coffee in locomotives is in no sense festive. It is a deliberate, systematic destruction for strategic ends. So too is military expenditure (perhaps only advertising...). The economic system cannot transcend itself in an act of festive waste, caught up as it is in its own alleged \`rationality'. It can only devour its excess of wealth as it were shamefully, practising a calculated destructiveness that is complementary to its productivity calculations. 1 The term \`inequality' is inappropriate. The equality/inequality opposition ideologically [return] linked to the system of modern democratic values, only fully covers economic disparities and cannot figure in a structural analysis. 2 Or the \`Great Society', recently imported into France. [return] 3 On this point, see Chapter 7 in relation to \`lowest common culture' and \`lowest [return] common multiples'. 4 It is, of course, in its functioning as a system of social differentiation (2 above) that [return] consumption takes on this unlimited dimension. As a system of communication and The consumer society exchange (1 above), where it may be compared to language, a finite range of goods and services (like the finite material of linguistic signs) can very well suffice, as we see in primitive societies. Language [la langue] does not proliferate because there is no ambivalence of the sign at that level, that ambivalence being grounded in social hierarchy and simultaneous double determination. By contrast, a certain level of parole and style does give rise again to distinctive proliferation. 5 On this point, see Chapter 5, section \`Consumption as the Emergence and Control of [return] New Productive Forces'. 6 This is the \`reserve army' of needs. [return] 7 This growing differentiation does not necessarily signify a growing distance from the [return] top to the bottom of the scale, a \`greater overall imbalance', but increasing discrimination, an increase in the quantity of distinctive signs within a hierarchy whose extremes have moved closer together. Relative \`democratization' and homogeinzation are accompanied by a related intensification in status competition. 8 In this sense, the distinction between \`real' and \`artificial' needs is also a false [return] problem. \`Artificial needs' do, of course, mask the non-satisfaction of \`essential' needs (television instead of education). But this is secondary to generalized determination by growth (the expanded reproduction of capital), in respect of which the terms \`natural' and \`artificial' have no meaning. We might even say that this natural-artificial opposition, which implies a theory of human finalities, is itself an ideological product of growth. It is reproduced by growth and is functionally linked to it. 9 Les Temps modernes, October 1968. [return] 1 Quoted by Galbraith, The New Industrial State, Signet, New York, 1967, epigraph to [return] Chapter 10. 2 In the survey carried out by Sélection du Reader's Digest (A. Piatier, \`Structures et [return] perspectives de la consommation européenne'), the pattern which emerges is not one of an immense middle class, as in the case of the USA, but that of a minority, a consumer elite (the As) serving as a model for a majority which does not yet possess that range of luxury goods (sports car, stereo, second home) which every European worthy of the name must have. 3 Galbraith, The New Industrial State, p. 215. [return] 4 Ibid., p. 222. [return] 5 This is the \`anti-coagulant' effect of advertising (Elgozy). [return] 6 Galbraith, The New Industrial State, p. 281. [return] 7 Ibid., p. 279. [return] 8 Ibid., p. 280. [return] 9 On this, see this chapter, section \`Consumption as the Emergence and Control of [return] New Productive Forces'. 10 J. Baudrillard, \`The ideological genesis of needs', in For a Critique of the Political [return] Economy of the Sign, Telos, St Louis, 1981, pp. 63-87. 11 This paragraph has been slightly modified by the author (Tr.). [return] 12 La Nef, no. 37. [return] 13 Galbraith, The New Industrial State, p. 49. [return] 14 On this point, see Chapter 10, 'The Mystique of Solicitude'. [return] 1 It is the same with relationships. The system is built upon a total liquidation of [return] personal ties, of concrete social relations. It is to this extent that it becomes necessarily and systematically productive of relationship (public relations, human relations, etc.). The production of relationships has become one of the key sectors of production. And because they no longer have anything spontaneous about them, because they are produced, those relationships are necessarily fated, like all that is produced, to be consumed (unlike social relations, which are the unconscious product of social labour and not the result of deliberate, controlled industrial production: these are not \`consumed' but are, in fact, the site of social contradictions). On the production and consumption of human relations and social relationships, see Chapter 10, \`The Mystique of Solicitude'. 2 D. Riesman, Abundance for What? And Other Essays, Chatto and Windus, London, [return] 1964, p. 129. 3 D. Riesman (with N. Glazer and R. Denney), The Lonely Crowd: A Study of the [return] Changing American Character, Doubleday Anchor, New York, n.d., pp. 98-9. 4 See Chapter 11, section \`Violence'. [return] 1 The reference is to the Le Président health clubs. See note 4 to Chapter 8 (Tr.). [return] 2 If beauty is to be found in the \`figure', the career is defined by its \`profile'. Such [return] connivances of vocabulary are significant. 3 See this chapter, section \`Pseudo-Event and Neo-Reality'. The term \`gadget' covers a [return] rather different semantic field in French, referring in particular to objects which are not necessarily technical implements, but merely useless objects of a \`gimmicky' kind. However, since the French usage will be reasonably clear from the author's argument here, I have generally retained the term \`gadget', which has at least equally pejorative connotations in English (Galbraith writes, \`The word gadget is itself a pejorative term for durable goods', The Affluent Society, p. 162) (Tr.). 4 Tirlipot is the name of a 1960s radio quiz game. [return] 5 Le Monde, 28 September 1969. [return] 6 There is, in this sense, a relationship of sorts between kitsch and snobbery. However, [return] snobbery is linked, rather, to the aristocracy/bourgeoisie acculturation process and kitsch essentially to the rise of the \`middle' classes in a bourgeois industrial society. 7 But it is not a toy, as the toy has a symbolic function for the child. However, a \`new [return] look' toy, a fashionable toy becomes a gadget once again simply by dint of such modishness. 8 The pure gadget, defined as something totally useless to anyone at all, would be an [return] absurdity. 9 An annual French competition for artisans and inventors (Tr.). [return] 10 See Daniel J. Boorstin, The Image, or What Happened to the American Dream, Penguin, [return] Harmondsworth, 1963. 11 The cubists were still searching for the \`essence' of space, seeking to unveil a \`secret [return] geometry', etc. In Dada, Duchamp or the surrealists, objects were wrenched from their (bourgeois) functions to be set up in their subversive banality, in a reminder of their lost essence and of an order of authenticity evoked by way of the absurd. In Francis Ponge, the apprehension of the naked, concrete object is still the act of a -- poetic -- consciousness or source of perception. In short, whether poetic or critical, the whole of art, \`without which things would merely be what they are', is fuelled (before pop) by transcendence. 12 Cf. the Conclusion, section \`The Consumption of Consumption'. [return] 13 Mario Amaya, Pop as Art: A Survey of the New Super Realism, Studio Vista, London, [return] 1965. 14 In this sense, the truth of pop might be said to be wage labour and the advertising [return] hoarding, not the contract and the art gallery. 15 \`Popular' art is concerned not with objects, but always primarily with human beings [return] and their actions. It would not paint cooked meats or the American flag, but a-man-eating or aman-saluting-the-American-flag. 16 In fact we often read this \`terroristic' humour in it, but we do so out of critical [return] nostalgia on our part. 17 Marshall McLuhan, Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man, Sphere, London, [return] 1967, p. 27. 18 It is easy to see how one can, in this sense, \`consume' language [du langage]. As soon [return] as it becomes loaded with in-group connotations, and, instead of being a vehicle for meaning, turns into a group lexicon, a class or caste heritage (the style of the \`smart set', intellectual jargon; the political jargon of a party or grouping); as soon as it ceases to be a means of exchange and becomes a material of exchange for the internal usage of a group or class--its real function, under cover of conveying a message, being one of collusion and recognition; and as soon as, rather than putting meaning into circulation, it begins itself to circulate as password, as shibboleth, in a process of group tautology (the group speaking itself), then language is an object of consumption, a fetish. It is no longer being used as a language [langue], as a system of distinctive denotative signs, but consumed as a system of connotation, as a distinctive code. We find the same process in \`medical consumption'. There has been an extraordinary inflation of the demand for health care, closely linked to the rise in the standard of living. The line between \`justifiable' demand (though on what definition of a vital minimum and bio-psychosomatic equilibrium might it be considered justified?) and the consumer compulsion for medical, surgical and dental treatment is becoming blurred. Medical practice is turning into the use of the doctor him/herself and this sumptuary, conspicuous use of the doctor/object, the medicine/object, joins the second home and the car as part of the panoply of social standing. Here again, the medication--and, particularly where the wealthier classes are concerned, the doctor (Balint: \`The medication most frequently dispensed in general practice is the doctor himself')--cease to be the means of achieving health, considered as a final goal, and become themselves the focus of the ultimate demand. They are then consumed, on the selfsame pattern of a diverting of the objective practical function into a mental manipulation and a sign-based calculus of a fetishistic type. \`consumption' in so far as the doctor no longer has any specific value at this level: he is substitutable, as anxiety-reducer or care-provider, for any other process of partial regression: alcohol, shopping or collecting (the consumer \`collects' the doctor and medicines). The doctor is consumed as one-sign-among-others (just as a washing machine may be consumed as a mark of status and ease--see Chapter 7). At a deep level, then, what institutes \`medical consumption' is--beyond the neurotic logic of individuals--a social logic of status, which incorporates the doctor as sign (quite apart from any objective performance and on the same basis as any other value attribute) into a generalized system. We can see that it is on the abstraction (the reduction) of the medical function that medical consumption is established. We find this pattern of systematic abduction or rerouting [détournement] everywhere as the very principle of consumption. 19 Boorstin, The Image, p. 209. [return] 20 This is why all forms of resistance to the introduction of advertising on TV or [return] elsewhere are merely moralizing or archaic reactions. The problem lies at the level of the system of signification as a whole. 21 Boorstin, The Image, p. 213. [return] 22 Ibid., p. 217. [return] 23 Ibid., p. 219. [return] 1 The reference in the hymn is, however, not to the body, but to the soul (Tr.). [return] 2 The original cartes du tendre were, of course, actual \`maps' or charts depicting the [return] course of love (Tr.). 3 See also this exemplary text from Vogue: [return] A new wind is blowing through the world of beauty, a fresher, freer, healthier, less hypocritical wind of pride in one's body. Not pretentiousness, which is vulgar. But the honest awareness that our bodies are worth accepting, caring for, loving,if they are to be well used. We are happy that our knees are more supple, we are delighted with the length of our legs, with our lighter feet ... (for these we use a mask as we do for the face ... we massage our toes with an extraordinary \`supersonic' cream, we find ourselves a good chiropodist ... see how on page 72). We are all for the new body-spray perfumes, which give a satiny finish right down to our toes. Left, mules in South African ostrich-feathers with embroidery by Lamel (Christian Dior). Etc. 4 In French, le phrynéisme. The reference here is to the Greek courtesan Phryne, who [return] \`when she saw that in spite of the eloquence of her defender Hyperides she was going to be condemned, ... unveiled her bosom, and by this sudden display of her charms so influenced her judges, that she was immediately acquitted' (Lempriè's Classical Dictionary, Bracken, London, 1984, p. 526) (Tr.). 5 The male equivalent of the Elle text is the advert for Le Président entitled \`No pity for [return] executives?' This is an admirable text, which encapsulates all the themes we have analysed here (narcissism, the revenge of the neglected body, functional \`recycling'), except that here the masculine model centres on \`physical fitness' and social success, whereas the feminine model focused on \`beauty' and \`seduction'. Forty years old. Modern civilization commands him to be young. The paunch which was once a symbol of social success is now synonymous with decline and the scrapheap. His superiors, his subordinates, his wife, his secretary, his mistress, his children and the girl in the microskirt he's chatting to at his table outside the café (with who knows what in mind) all judge him on the quality and style of his clothes, his choice of tie and aftershave, the suppleness and slenderness of his body. He has to keep a watchful eye on everything: the crease in his trousers, his collar, his puns, his feet when he dances, his diet when he eats, his stamina when he is climbing stairs, his back when he makes a violent effort. If, only yesterday, efficiency in his work was enough, today he is required to possess both physical fitness and elegance. The myth of the healthy American businessman, part James Bond, part Henry Ford, confident and sure of himself, physically and psychologically well balanced, has taken its place in our civilization. Finding and keeping dynamic co-workers with pep and drive is the major concern of every business manager. The forty-year-old falls in with this image. This neo-Narcissus of modern times likes to take care of himself, and tries to enjoy himself. He savours his diet, his medication, his physical training, the difficulty he has stopping smoking. Aware that his social success depends entirely on the image others have of him, that physical fitness is his trump card, the man of forty is looking for his second wind and his second youth. There follows the advert for Le Président. There, it is chiefly fitness that is being: fitness, the magic word, that \`fairy godmother's gift' (after Narcissus, the fairies!), which managing directors, senior executives, journalists and doctors pursue \`in an air-conditioned, cocooned atmosphere and \`using 37 sets of apparatus with pedals, wheels, weights, vibrations, levers and steel cables' (as one can see, both athleticism and phryneism, both \`fitness' and \`beauty', are partial to gadgetry). 6 In the technical sense of simulations where the conditions of weightlessness are [return] simulated experimentally--or of mathematical models. 7 The truth of the body is desire. And this, being lack, cannot be shown. The most [return] exhaustive exhibition of that desire merely highlights it as absence, and ultimately, merely censors it. Will we one day see photos in which erections are shown? This would still be done under the heading of fashion. The censors thus ultimately have nothing to fear, except from their own desire. 8 Norman O. Brown, Life against Death: The Psychoanalytical Meaning of History, [return] Wesleyan University Press, Middletown, CT, p. 252. 9 On this point, see Chapter 6, section \`The Structural Models'. [return] 10 Sexuality is no longer a celebration [une fête]. It is an erotic festival, with all that [return] implies in terms of organization. Within the framework of that festival, everything is done also to revive \`polymorphous, perverse' sexuality. Cf. the first world fair of pornography in Copenhagen [this chapter, section \`The Sex-Exchange Standard']. 11 We find the same process in the \`consumption' of Technology. Without wishing to [return] contest the enormous impact of technological progress on social progress, one can see how technology itself falls into the domain of consumption, dividing into a daily practice \`liberated' by innumerable \`functional' gadgets and a transcendent myth of (capital T) Technology, the combination of the two making it possible to head off all the revolutionary potentialities of a total social practice of technology. See Utopie, no. 2-3, May 1969, \`La Pratique sociale et la technique'. 12 The French verb solliciter contains an ambiguity, referring at times to a demand or [return] even manipulation [the expression solliciter des textes implies forcing texts or documents to yield significations which they do not clearly contain (Tr.)], at times to solicitude and gratification. See Chapter 10, \`The Mystique of Solicitude'. 13 The Danish parliament (Tr.). [return] 14 This line does not actually seem to appear in either of Rimbaud's \`Villes' poems [return] (commonly known as \`Villes I' and \`Villes II') (Tr.). 15 This phrase occurs with slight variations of emphasis in two letters which Rimbaud [return] wrote in May 1871. The first of these is to Georges Izambard, the second to Paul Demeny. Originals and translations of both letters are to be found in Wallace Fowlie's Rimbaud: Complete Works, Selected Letters, University of Chicago Press, Chicago and London, 1966, pp. 302-11 (Tr.). 1 It might be thought that time is, in this respect, opposed to all other objects, whose [return] \`use-value' traditionally lies in being possessed, utilized, employed to advantage. But this is without doubt a profound error. The true use-value of objects is doubtless also to be consumed, to be expended \`as pure loss' -- a \`symbolic' use-value which is everywhere scored out [barrée] and replaced by \`utilitarian' use-value. 2 But the goal of the operation here remains strictly individual. In the archaic festival, [return] time is never expended \`for oneself': it is the time of collective prodigality. 1 Twenty per cent of national income for France. [return] 2 Advertising itself, as an economic process, may be regarded as a \`free celebration', [return] financed by social labour but delivered to everyone \`with nothing apparently given in return' and presenting itself as collective gratification (see later in this chapter). 3 Cf. Lagneau in Le Faire-Valoir, \`Advertising is the wrapping up of an unbearable [return] economic logic in the thousand seductive artifices of "exemption from payment", which negate it the better to allow it to operate.' G. Lagneau, Le Faire-Valoir, E.M.E., Paris, 1969. 4 On this problem, see the articles by J. Marcus-Steiff and P. Kende in the Revue française [return] de socioiogie, 1969, X, 3. 5 In German, the word werben, which means to ask for someone's hand in marriage and [return] hence implies loving concern [sollicitude amoureuse], also means competition, rivalry and advertising (commercial solicitation). 6 Riesman et al., The Lonely Crowd, p. 41. [return] 7 Ibid., p. 83. [return] 8 To take an example, \`In fact,' writes a specialist in sales promotion, \`if, before it was [return] presented to the public, Giscard d'Estaing's programme had been got into shape by an agency like Publicis, using the methods that were so successful in the Saint-Gobain affair, then French voters would probably have backed him.' And he adds: \`When you think of all the trouble you take to win the public's favour when you launch a new bar of soap, bringing all the modern resources of radio, TV and cinema into play, you are amazed by the antiquated methods the government employ when they want to "sell" an economic and financial programme running into billions of francs to the mass of the French people.' 9 Riesman et al., The Lonely Crowd, p. 224ff. [return] 10 Ibid., p. 225. [return] 1 \`Objectless craving' has its counterpart in \`objectless raving'. [return] 2 Galbraith, The Affluent Society, p. 14. [return] 3 Erostratus or Eratostratus was an Ephesian who burnt down the temple of Diana [return] solely with the object of achieving eternal fame. The Ephesians subsequently passed a law making it illegal to mention his name (Tr.). 4 Economists and psychologists base their thinking wholly on equivalence and rationality: [return] they postulate that, in all processes, the subject is always positively orientated, in a state of need, towards the object. If the need is satisfied, that is all there is to it. They forget that there is no \`satisfied need' a completed process, where there is only positivity, is something which is never found: there is only desire and desire is ambivalent. 5 Hence the very logical (American) idea of a motel for the suicidal where, for a [return] reasonable price, a \`suicide service', provided like any other social service (though not covered by social security!), ensures that you enjoy optimum conditions for death and undertakes to effect your suicide effortlessly, with a smile. 6 The original French text here is \`le malaise de la civilisation', the title of the standard [return] French translation of Freud's Das Unbehagen in der Kultur (English: Civilization and its Discontents) (Tr.). 7 J.S. Mill, On Liberty, ed. H.B. Acton, Dent/Dutton, London/New York, 1972, p. 124 [return] (my italics, JB). 1 There have been at least three versions of this film. From what he says, Baudrillard is [return] clearly not referring to the first of these (Stellan Rye, 1913) and it seems most likely that he is familiar with the 1926 film by the Dutch-born writer-director Henrik Galeen (who was also involved in the earlier production). A further German version was made in 1936 by the Chicagoborn director Arthur Robison (Tr.). 2 Like all myths, this one also seeks to ground itself in an original event. In this case, it [return] is the so-called \`Revolution of Affluence', a historical revolution of Well-Being, the last revolution of Western man after the Renaissance, the Industrial Revolution and the Political Revolutions. Consumption thereby presents itself as the opening of a new era -- the final era of achieved Utopia and the end of history. 3 Boorstin, The Image, p. 240. [return] 4 Ibid., p. 83. [return] 5 Ibid., p. 259. [return] 
