# The Maturation of HCI: Moving beyond Usability toward Holistic Interaction
Authors: Ken Maxwell
---CONTENT---
# The Maturation of HCI: Moving beyond Usability toward Holistic Interaction Ken Maxwell ## 9.1 Introduction Human-computer interaction (HCI) is a discipline devoted to helping people meet their needs and goals by making computing technology accessible, meaningful, and satisfying. At the beginning of this new millennium the discipline of HCI is developing in earnest to serve the expanding needs of people who live increasingly mobile and interconnected lifestyles with growing expectations of support for their lifestyles from emerging computing technologies. In grappling with the problems of integrating new technologies with new lifestyles, HCI is maturing—but in which directions? What does it mean to have mature HCI? How will it be achieved? What changes in the way HCI is practiced will accompany maturity? This paper presents particular answers to these questions in the context of HCI for personal and business computing. Specialized applications such as HCI in aviation or manufacturing are not directly addressed. There are several different perspectives from which researchers can assess HCI maturity. From a technology-based perspective, researchers can assess the maturity of interaction technologies. For example, the maturity of speech recognition can be measured quantitatively with respect to several performance factors. From a modelbased perspective, researchers can assess the maturity of interaction models with respect to their predictive power. From a process-based perspective, researchers can assess the maturity of methods with respect to their efficiency and effectiveness. For example, the Software Engineering Institute (SEI) has developed the Capability Maturity Model (CMM) to drive software process improvement (Caputo 1998). This model does not specify particular software architectures but instead addresses the maturity of the process of building software by instituting key practices in a staged manner. The model has five levels, and SEI certifies software companies at each level of capability when their respective criteria are satisfied. SEI designed the model so that a company can mature its capabilities and progress to higher-level certification over time. The progression of levels represents greater organizational self-awareness and manageability. Hefley et al. (1995) argue that rigorous processes, methods, and techniques are necessary for an engineering discipline to mature. These researchers further argue that the field of HCI should be working toward making HCI’s engineering processes repeatable and well defined. These characteristics are in accordance with moving to higher levels in the CMM. Hefley et al. argue that by making its processes more rigorous HCI will not only mature as a discipline but will also move toward integration with software engineering practices. Processes and practices are important, and their rigor reflects the maturity of some aspects of the discipline that applies them. However, HCI is primarily a discipline focused on people, and it is about helping to make their relationship with and use of computers easier, more productive, and more fulfilling. The discipline of HCI is only focused on process, models, or technology to the degree that having these facilitates meeting its primary people-oriented goals. Viewed in this way, the maturation of the HCI discipline should represent a progression in the types of human needs and goals that the discipline supports. Maslow (1962) proposed a model for personal growth consisting of a hierarchy of needs that can serve loosely as an analog for an HCI maturity model. Maslow’s hierarchy is most recognizable for the stage of self-actualization. In this model low-level, or more basic, needs in the hierarchy have to be satisfied before higher-level needs can be achieved. Both Maslow’s growth model and the CMM share the characteristic of moving from fulfillment of basic requirements toward mastery of greater problems. However, where the CMM focuses on process, Maslow focuses on needs. Analogously, the work in HCI can be viewed as a progression moving from supporting the basic needs and goals of users toward supporting higher-level human needs and goals with computing technology. Section 9.2 differentiates three levels that illustrate a progression of the character of interaction from people-friendly (past) to people-familiar (present) to people-intimate (future). The human-centered development approach can be used to develop HCI at all three levels. Between levels, the breadth of human needs and goals that are addressed change, as do the methods, techniques, and tools used by system designers to understand people’s needs and goals and to create designs that support them. Viewing HCI maturation in this way provides a general compass to assess the directions in which the field will move and a means to assess its progress. Since the third level represents the future, the description of it includes a discussion of possible changes in HCI practice that will help to enable it. ## 9.2 Present Levels of HCI Maturity ## 9.2.1 Level 1 HCI: Basic Usability During the past 20 years, computers have been vigorously transferred from laboratories and central data processing centers, in which only skilled experts used them, to offices and homes, for use by people who need to perform a wide range of tasks that can be assisted by personal computing technologies. However, this expanded group of computer users was not necessarily trained in computer technology. The usability needs of these new computer users propelled the growth of HCI as a discipline of study and focused its primary goal on making computers easier to use. Basic usability, as the term is used here, involves an assortment of support for needs such as ease of use, ease of learning, error protection, graceful error recovery, and efficiency of performance. The use of graphical user interfaces (GUIs), interaction metaphors, direct manipulation, point-and-click input devices, user interface management systems, GOMS models (Card et al. 1983; Kieras 1988), and design standards to achieve intuitive and visually rich interaction have dominated this stage. HCI at this level is closely associated with engineering models and processes. A goal of many practitioners is to integrate the HCI development process with the overall system engineering process (de Baar et al. 1992; Hefley et al. 1995). Work at level 1 has been ongoing since the beginning of HCI as a discipline. As HCI develops to address people’s higher-level needs and goals, work on basic usability issues will continue to be needed. New computing and interaction technologies will require work at this level to make them available and mature enough for application at other levels. ## 9.2.2 Level 2 HCI: Collaborative, Organizational, and Role-Based Interaction In more recent years, the rapid proliferation of distributed and networked computing, and its convergence with communication technology has generated an expansion of attention that moves beyond the basic usability issues addressed by level 1 to questions about the sociological, organizational, and cultural impact of computing. Although these questions have been of concern since before home and office computer use became widespread (Tomeski 1976; Wachtel 1976), they had received less emphasis while the need to design usable office and home computer systems was more immediate. The explosive growth of the Internet, enterprise computing systems, decision support systems, and research in computer-supported cooperative work (CSCW) has spawned renewed interest and placed renewed importance in the role HCI plays in organizations and transactions among people. In particular, HCI’s scope of interest has expanded to issues of organizational structure, the nature of work, defining roles in organizations, customization of processes, and teamwork. For example, Grudin and Markus (1997) examined organizational issues influencing both the development and use of HCI. Karsten and Jones (1998) performed a case study to examine the influence of collaborative technology, specifically Lotus Notes, on organizational change within a Finnish computer consultancy. They concluded that, at least for the case studied, collaborative technology can be adopted by individuals to support work in a variety of ways and that a collaborative organizational culture is not necessarily required. Davenport (1998) studied the experiences of several companies in implementing an enterprise computing system. The results indicated that companies that were able to view the introduction of enterprise systems in strategic and organizational terms rather than technological terms had the best success and that the need for top-level management involvement is crucial. Work on organization and collaboration issues has in part illuminated the users’ need for and the value of tailoring the interaction with regard to user roles. One prominent area using this approach is role-based access control (RBAC). Several systems have been developed and are currently used that apply RBAC to ease the tasks associated with user security and authorization. The work in this area has been prolific enough to support an annual conference sponsored by ACM/SIGSAC (Special Interest Group on Security, Audit, and Control). Role-based interaction techniques have also been applied to broader system administration and management tasks (Lupu and Sloman 1997). The usefulness of role-based interaction has also been illuminated by the increased realization that a one-size-fits-all approach to developing tools for people with different goals, responsibilities, and priorities is ill fated. In the one-size-fits-all approach tools become cumbersome and loaded down with many features, only a handful of which will ever be used by everyone. Customization features embedded in the application provide users with some capability to tailor the interaction to their needs, but these are not extensive and still leave many features that will not be used. Additionally, these complex one-size-fits-all tools tend to be focused on activities such as document preparation rather than on roles. Shneiderman (1998) views “role-centered design” as a natural progression from interaction designs that are activity-centered. The Personal Role Manager (PRM) he describes is an example of a concept for supporting work with a role-centered lens that permits a focus on tasks, people, schedules, and other activities within a given role. Dertouzos (1998) advocates a role-based approach in arguing that designers should focus on the best way for people in different occupations (such as executives, surgeons, engineers, teachers, and artists) to communicate their indigenous concepts to computers. In related work, the decision support systems and commitment model proposed by Winograd and Flores (1986) is another approach to supporting the needs and goals of individuals within organizations with respect to the roles they occupy. In some applications of the role-based approach the use of roles is efficient because it reduces the need to handle each user individually. For example, RBAC streamlines the administrative load but allows an individual user’s authorizations to be set by assigning that user to a predefined role. This reduces the demand to individually assign authorizations for each user. The role-based approach has not always been successful or liked by users. It can be constraining and can establish barriers to adaptability and flexibility in organizations. However, the role-based approach represents a step away from a one-size-fits-all interaction model toward a more personally tailored interaction model. This step is carried further in the next level of HCI, which places emphasis on a broader set of issues that will drive interaction to become both more individualistic and holistic in nature. ## 9.3 Future HCI: Level 3: Individualized and Holistic Interaction ## 9.3.1 The Future Computing Environment The future computing environment will be ubiquitous, invisible, embedded, tangible, virtual, active, integrated, interconnected, interoperable, and mobile. These characteristics define an environment that is always on, always at hand, pervasive, and blended. They reveal a vision in which the physical and virtual environments are tightly intermingled and much less distinguishable than they are today. In this vision people will communicate with an array of information-based devices using a variety of modalities. They will command clever electronic agents, generate virtual identities, and project their virtual presence to anywhere from anywhere. In this vision communications, media, information resources, commerce, and entertainment converge. In this environment people’s bodies are blended with devices that are worn or implanted, and they travel through hybrid physical-virtual spaces populated with active and aware artifacts that behave in symphonic harmony to produce a nearly seamless biophysical-psychosocial-cyber-kinetic reality. The vision described above is a collective one that emerges from the ideas and work of many researchers in HCI. Weiser (1995) and Norman (1998) both develop compelling arguments for the value of ubiquitous and invisible computing. In the not-too-distant future it is conceivable that we will not think about computers as definable products but rather as critical parts of many varied information-based tools and artifacts. Ubiquitous and invisible computing refers to transferring computing technology from general-purpose machines that incorporate many functional tools to more special-purpose tools that embed computing technology. This approach is intended to create a conceptual shift from thinking about using the computer to performing tasks and activities. Weiser (1995) imagines computing technology becoming an ubiquitous and integral part of life that disappears into the environment. He describes machines of three scales of size ranging from inches to feet to yards, called tabs, pads, and boards, respectively. These devices can support applications such as smart cards and active whiteboards. Norman (1998) has expounded a concept called information appliances. These embed computing technology in devices designed to perform specific tasks and share information. They are the result of a design strategy to manage complexity by breaking apart unrelated functions into separate devices. Examples of such appliances provided by Norman include a home financial center, active badges, active whiteboards, wearable devices, and implanted health aids. Cerf (1997), in presenting a scenario of future interaction, describes pervasive technology consisting of sensory networks, integrated media, virtual environments, intelligent agents, and highly mobile computing devices. Ishii (1997), Resnick et al. (1998), and Wrensch and Eisenberg (1998) have all developed imaginative concepts for integrating IT into tangible artifacts that are active, aware, and programmable. Mann (1998) provides descriptions of innovative concepts for assorted wearable computing devices. These researchers, among many others, have addressed the need and benefits of interoperability and interconnectivity of information-based devices. This vision represents what many forward-looking researchers in HCI see as the path toward resolving persistent problems associated with the human use of advanced computing technology. In the imaginations and work of these researchers, information technology (IT) designed with these characteristics represents a way to harness computing power, manage its complexity, and deliver its benefits. Information technology possessing these characteristics will help people make sense of the world of future technology, realize the productivity improvements that Landauer (1995) and Tenner (1996) have pointed out have so far been marginal and elusive, and make IT serve the human purposes for which it is intended. ## 9.3.2 Individualized and Holistic Interaction Design In the ubiquitous computing environment of the future a significant piece of the total environment with which people will interact will consist of information technologies. These technologies will be tightly integrated into the totality of our interaction with and experience of the everyday world around us. In a very real sense the environment created by these technologies will become part of the fabric of the environment and an integral part of our phenomenological field. In this new and augmented reality our psychosocial development and well-being will be affected by our skill in interacting with it and our ability to differentiate a self-concept from it. Holistic interaction is a concept for developing interaction environments that will address people’s needs in living in this new, augmented world. Conceptually, holistic interaction is akin to holistic medicine. Holistic medicine is a view of health and healing that accounts for the physical, psychological, social, and environmental factors affecting an individual’s wellness, rather than adopting a narrow medical model of disease and healing. It accounts for individual needs and lifestyles, and emphasizes the notions of self-care and self-healing. A major part of therapy for psychological and social problems is concerned with the manner in which the treated person interacts with and reacts to other people and situations in the world. In the new augmented world, people will be interacting globally with a set of interactive agents, environments, devices, and other people. Their skills, strategies, and effectiveness in interacting with these new pieces of the world will affect their psychosocial and physical well-being. This situation calls for an approach to interaction that accounts for the range of factors addressed by holistic medicine and that emphasizes the subjective nature of successful interaction. Holistic interaction is a concept for an approach to interaction design that would foster productivity, performance, safety, teamwork, effective habits, and personal growth with respect to an individual’s personal needs, goals, and lifestyle. In doing this, the interaction design will need to account for the individual’s cognitive and perceptual capabilities, biophysical capabilities, emotional needs, personality traits, and situational factors. As such, holistic interaction design will account for the lowerlevel HCI design needs and in addition address higher-level needs not considered at the other levels. Attention to individual needs is an important part of holistic interaction design. Customization through preferences, templates, end-user programming (Eisenberg 1997), and user-level extensions (Alexandrov 1998) are ways in which software and interfaces are individualized today. These techniques provide a way to meet some individual needs, but they do not address the type of customization needed to address the individual higher-level needs addressed by level 3. Research in areas that will be valuable for designing individualized customizations of interaction environments is currently being done. For example, Dillon and Watson (1996) argue that knowledge of differences between people can be valuable in defining interfaces that will differentially assist people based on traits. Smith and O’Brian (1998) present a model to address the need to recouple interfaces that have been subjectively tailored in doing cooperative tasks. Schiano and White (1998) examined the use of virtual identities by participants in LamdaMOO, a social multi-user domain. These are a few examples of the interest in and value of developing HCI that supports individual needs and goals. Along with a focus on individual needs, holistic interaction design will focus attention on developing an interaction environment that fosters opportunity for personal growth, creativity, teamwork, and promotion of effective habits. Goleman (1998) presents a model of emotional intelligence that includes five components: self-awareness, self-regulation, motivation, empathy, and social skill. Each of these components is further broken down into more specific indicators. Covey (1991) presents seven habits of highly effective people and principle-centered leadership. Both Goleman and Covey agree that these characteristics can be learned. An example design goal of holistic interaction could be to design methods of interaction that would help individuals in developing these characteristics with respect to their individual needs and desire to do so. This aspect of holistic interaction is somewhat akin to the idea of machine “coaching” described by Winograd and Flores (1986) in which new possibilities for interpretations and action are generated through interaction. With reference to computers facilitating thinking and problem solving skills, holistic interaction is also the type of interaction envisioned by Licklidder (1960). Holistic interaction design would also address issues related to an individual’s emotions and motivation. In his recent review of developments in cognitive social psychology Schwartz (1998) reveals renewed interest in models that incorporate the interplay between emotion and cognition. An exercise in holistic interaction design could be to apply these models to design an interaction environment that enhanced both cognitive performance and personal comfort by providing the needed emotional context. Additionally, holistic interaction design would address potential problems that computer use poses for our psychological and social well-being. Since the computing world of the future will be much more tightly integrated with the physical world than it is today, HCI as a discipline will not be as clearly differentiated as it is today. The design of interaction between people and computing technology will be increasingly concerned with the broader picture of how computing technology is integrated with the total environment and how people interact with the total integrated environment rather than just a piece of it. Some practitioners in the HCI field will continue to work on specific areas and problems. These may lead increasingly to splintered and isolated subdisciplines. However, a group of practitioners will work on the holistic design level and integrate computing interface technologies with the physical world with regard to individual needs. Work at the holistic interaction level will increasingly overlap with work by other disciplines that deal with the interaction of people with other people and the environment. At this point HCI designers, architects, interior designers, fashion designers, business process and organizational specialists, therapists, and other types of counselors and consultants will work together to create new and integrated approaches to holistic interaction design. ## 9.3.3 Moving toward Holistic Interaction Progression of HCI design toward holistic interaction will not happen without change. This section describes three major movements that could facilitate the progress toward holistic interaction design. Each movement impacts the manner in which HCI is designed and developed. Together these three movements present an alternative to developing HCI as an integral part of the engineering process and designing interfaces that are optimized across the entire range of users. ## 9.3.3.1 Moving beyond Engineering Engineering processes have played a major role in the design and development of human-computer systems. One goal of many HCI practitioners is to more deeply and seamlessly integrate HCI processes with engineering processes. These efforts are appropriate for the lower levels of HCI. However, as the evolution toward an ubiquitous computing environment becomes realized, HCI design will continue to broaden in scope by addressing a wide range of interaction design issues that will increasingly be external to engineering. As the issues that HCI addresses become more distant from engineering solutions and models, these integration efforts become increasingly inappropriate. Furthermore, Pool (1997) demonstrates that the success of products is determined in great part by factors outside of engineering. Consider the relationship between the designers and the engineering disciplines in the following examples. Fashion Design. The relationship of HCI designers to computer engineering in some respects is akin to the relationship between a fashion designer and materials engineering. Fashion designers rely on materials technology to provide the substance of the design, and clothing design is limited by the material offerings. But the technology involved with producing the materials does not drive the fashion design. Clothing serves many more purposes than its basic utility of protection from the environment. Although the fit of clothes and their appropriateness for different activities is important, clothing conveys status and personality, differentiates cultures, projects power, and builds conformity. In addition, clothing alters perceptions of morality, identity, and privacy. A fashion designer is a human interface designer and relies on materials engineers. Designers may work with engineers to develop new materials that have desired weight, water resistance, breathing quality, and other properties. The design process, however, is distinct from the development of the materials and the process of making the clothes. The more attention the fashion designer gives to people’s needs that go beyond basic utility, the wider the gap between what the designer does and the engineers do. In these cases, psychology, sociology, culture, personal taste and style, and many other nonengineering factors drive the design. Now consider the blending of computing technology with people’s bodies and clothing. Researchers have generated many ideas for devices that would be implanted or worn and that perform numerous useful tasks without much intervention by the person wearing or hosting them. The usability of these devices is important, but HCI designers should not be limited to the usability issues concerning these devices and should address questions of how the extra-usability areas of our lives will be impacted by these devices. People’s desire to project their individuality or affiliations by the clothes they choose will be extended to wearable computing devices and designers will have to account for these higher-level user needs. Interior Design. In the ubiquitous computing environment of the future, HCI design in many respects will be more akin to the design of habitat than to mechanism. In this environment, HCI’s relationship to engineering is akin to the relationship of architects, interior designers, and landscape architects to civil, electrical, and mechanical engineers. The issues of secure structural and electrical design and the sizing of doors and stairways to accommodate human dimensions are addressed by these designers in close relationship with the engineers and builders. However, issues of personal taste, styles of use, aesthetics, and emotion drive the design externally of engineering. Information technology is moving toward creating an electronic habitat that will augment and be integrated with the physical habitat. Engineering will provide the basic technologies and infrastructure for building this habitat, but HCI, along with other disciplines, will provide the design of the habitat itself. As the psychological and sociological issues associated with the human experience of ubiquitous computing are addressed, engineering will become less important in influencing the design solutions. Engineering will need to supply many answers. However, just as materials engineers do not design fashions and civil engineers do not design kitchens, computer engineers will not design the virtual habitat. The issue for HCI is one of self-identity. Is HCI a specialty engineering discipline— that is, another “ility” that should be integrated with a general system engineering process? Alternatively, is HCI a separate type of discipline, neither engineering, social science, nor environmental science? The maturity model presented earlier suggests that it is a bit of both. Which one depends on the level of human needs and goals being addressed and the application domain. In the development of complex human-machine systems, such as commercial aircraft and nuclear power plants, designers model humans as components of the overall system. In the design of such systems, HCI tightly aligns with engineering processes. Concerns of human performance and reliability are paramount. In the design of automobiles, human-factors designers address driver performance and safety issues using human-machine system models in which the human operator is an integral part of the overall system. Within this realm the system as a whole must be engineered, and human factors are again tightly aligned with engineering. However, many aspects of the automotive human-machine interface design move away from engineering to address issues of style and personal choice. This is a realm sitting between human factors and industrial design. The finished automobile design includes aspects that are driven by electrical and mechanical engineering disciplines, aspects driven by human factors (acting as an engineering discipline), aspects driven by human factors (acting as a psychological and sociological discipline), and industrial design. As HCI moves to higher levels in the maturation process, the interesting questions that will drive the design of personal and business computing systems are less directed toward software or hardware engineering and more directed toward psychology and sociology. Engineering models and methods cannot address these questions. ## 9.3.3.2 Uncoupling the Human Interface The previous section described how the relationship between HCI and engineering varied with the level of user needs that were addressed. As HCI matures toward addressing higher-level needs, there will be greater separation between interaction design and engineering, and a growing part of HCI design will be performed external to engineering. This situation will generate momentum to uncouple the design and development of the human interface from that of the functional technology. Uncoupling of the human interface from the functional software means that these two pieces of software can, in some ways, be designed and implemented independently from one another. This means that (1) each piece has code that is separable to some degree, (2) the pieces do not have to be developed concurrently, and (3) the pieces do not have to be designed or developed by the same individuals or teams. There can be many instances of human interfaces to the same application software, and these different instances can reflect the individual interaction styles, capabilities, and limitations of the different people who use them. At the presentation level, human interfaces can be highly customizable. The mechanism used to initiate an action doesn’t matter to the underlying functionality. All that matters to the functional software is that the interface incorporates a mechanism to communicate the user’s intention to initiate the action. I refer to intention here because it also does not matter to the functionality whether invoking the mechanism actually immediately initiates the action or if it first requires the user to verify that the action should be performed. Of course, this difference matters to overall performance, protection from errors, and other factors. However, it doesn’t inhibit the independent modularity that can exist between the human interface and the functional software that will perform the desired action. Think of purchasing an application program or an operating system that included the needed functionality but did not include a human interface to the functionality. As software has become a commodity, consumers have come to expect that software intended for human use incorporates a human interface. The very idea of software without the interface seems strange. This strong association between functionality and a human interface does not exist with hardware. Consumers are comfortable with viewing keyboards, pointing devices, monitors, and other peripheral devices as interchangeable. The concept of separable human interfaces in hardware extends to many different products. We can replace many parts of a bicycle, put new grips on golf clubs, and use any number of universal remote controls to operate home electronics. In the future consumers may have this same convenience with software, having human interface software developed and marketed as products independent from the software providing the functional services, and becoming what Norman (1998) calls a substitutable commodity. Hardware products inherit interface separation as a byproduct of component-based architecture and design. Components that adhere to standards are interchangeable and reusable. The analogous concept of developing new software with components has been emerging for several years. Object-oriented technology provides the framework for software component architecture and design. Component-based software development is attractive because it offers the potential for significant gains in productivity realized through reuse (D’souza and Wills 1999; Jacobson et al. 1997). Components change the manner in which software is developed and the way programmers work. The component development model is a fourth-generation technique in which programmers describe the problem and functions that need to be performed. Building the application amounts to collecting components, customizing them if needed, and connecting them together. To the degree that the needed components already exist, product development is faster and less expensive. Software code is only one type of reusable component. Other components include cost estimates, architectures, designs, test cases, and documentation. Today graphical user interfaces (GUIs) are constructed from various reusable components. Since human interface software can represent more than half the total code for a software product, use of GUI components can produce a significant saving. Components offer more than just reuse. They present new possibilities for flexible assembly of functionality and interchangeability of parts. Using component building blocks allows for work tools to be assembled in many different ways to meet specific task requirements at hand. In a distributed processing environment, components can be dynamically accessed and used as needed. With the ability to flexibly assemble functionality, we can put together the pieces in ways that make sense for tasks and combinations of tasks being performed in specific situations by specific individuals. Any number of interface components could be designed to interact with a given service component, and any number of components designed to perform the same service could interact with a given interface component. Technologies such as the Common Object Request Broker Architecture (CORBA) provide this interoperability. This is how component software development is supposed to work in theory, but this ease of development is not yet available. Often the “glue” code that connects the different components is difficult to define and introduces excessive overhead. Also, many of the issues and problems involving making software components interoperable to the degree described here still need to be solved. However, component technology is relatively new, it is growing in popularity, and its future seems promising. The concept of an uncoupled software interface has potential problems. Wulfman et al. (1988) present examples of the integration discontinuities that can occur when human interfaces are designed and developed before or after the application software. However, these discontinuities do not present an inherent barrier to developing these different pieces nonconcurrently. The primary barrier to effective sequential design of these parts is the degree to which they are designed without complete knowledge or understanding of what the other piece is capable of doing. If the designers of each piece have this requisite knowledge and understanding, then integration discontinuities should be no greater in the sequential design paradigm than they are in the concurrent design paradigm. What is needed is a bridge between interaction components and functional components that provides this knowledge and understanding and reduces the potential for integration discontinuities in the design. This bridge may be in the form of an abstract task model that could independently guide the development of both human interface and functional components. Much work will be required to determine a workable breakdown of tasks to define the functional components to perform the task and the complementary interface components to control it and receive applicable data. There is much interest in developing modeling techniques that integrate task and work design with software design. Butler et al. (1999) converge the Unified Modeling Language (UML) (Rumbaugh et al. 1999) for object-oriented analysis and design with IDEF3, a language for specifying work processes developed by the U.S. Air Force. Rosson (1999) develops user interaction scenarios as a means to integrate task and object-oriented software design. These user interaction scenarios are expansions of use-case scenarios that include the actor’s goals, expectations, and reactions. These research activities provide a basis for establishing a link between the development of human interfaces and the underlying functional software. In establishing this link, these researchers are attempting to place the design of human interaction and the design of software on common ground for the purposes of more tightly integrating them. However, this research could also form the basis for a task description standard that permits human interface and software design to be performed more independently from each other as long as both sides adhere to the standard. Johnson (1992) describes the use of selectors in the Application Construction Environment (ACE). Selectors provide abstract semantics for describing the functionality required for a human interface separately from the eventual widgets and layouts that will be used. Johnson’s intent is that by using selectors, designers will work at a level of application semantics instead of the lower level of individual widgets. Also, because the ACE includes rules for assigning appropriate widgets to selectors, designers will not make inappropriate widget choices. This work demonstrates that designs can be defined with respect to abstract and reusable application semantics. Although Johnson’s purposes and goals for selectors are different, the semantics that the selectors represent may provide a basis for the bridge between human interface and functional components. Object and component strategies of software development combined with distributed architectures and integration technologies work to reduce the need for custom products. Basically, new systems can be built and integrated using heterogeneous and distributed components that are reusable and interoperable if they conform to standards. In one sense these technologies can be viewed as reducing customization because the building blocks are commodities. Viewed from a system level, however, the flexibility inherent in reuse and interoperability of low-level components enables the customization of those systems. System integrators can pick and choose which components to use and integrate them in novel ways. Although the pieces of the system are ready-made, the system being built can uniquely meet the needs of customers. Using standard components to build customized systems has been an approach long valued by buyers of personal computers, bicycles, audiovisual equipment, and houses. When HCI moves beyond engineering, the value of customized human interfaces will drive HCI to meet individual customer’s needs more precisely. There is inherent tension between standardization and personalization of human interfaces. However, if decreed at the right level, standardization can stimulate competition by permitting interchangeability of parts from different sources. This substitutability allows system integrators flexibility in defining specific system components and characteristics, thus enabling customized systems to be developed from standard components. A potential concern for the uncoupled human interface movement is that manufacturers of information devices may decide to develop families of compatible devices that have proprietary interfaces, thus precluding independent vendors from marketing their interfaces to these devices. However, even with proprietary technology, manufacturers may choose to offer customized interfaces developed internally. Additionally, manufacturers could certify and license vendors to create uncoupled interface products specifically for their systems. These approaches would be used to compete with the personalization offered by architectures that are more open. Uncoupling the human interface is a means to provide greater variety and levels of customization in human interface design. It is a means to achieve mass customization (Pine 1993) of human interaction design. One motivation driving customization will be the fragmentation of customer demand across the wide range of informationbased devices and services that will be available in the future. A second motivation will be the increased need and desire for individual expression stemming from the seamless integration of computing technology into the environment and everyday experience. ## 9.3.3.3 The Information-Interaction Counselor In the ubiquitous computing environment, integrated computing, communication, media, commerce, and entertainment technologies will be delivered through many information-based devices that will be highly connectable and interoperable. In this scenario, many different forms of devices and services will be available from competing vendors. Functionality will be packaged together in many different ways to try to meet the fragmented demands of different people. In this situation, personality, lifestyle, and aesthetics as well as functional requirements matter. How will individuals, families, and businesses determine what combination of these products and services best meets their needs? One possibility is that their needs will be met by using information-interaction counselors (IICs) who would work with clients to match products and services to their particular needs and create customized interaction environments for them. The various services provided by the IICs may be performed by more than one person in a consulting firm. Performing the IIC functions would require expertise in information products and services, and fitting the available technology to the client’s needs. Clients could be individuals, families, businesses, or other organizations, both small and large. IICs would provide a mechanism to achieve mass customization of interfaces while avoiding incompatibilities or discontinuities in the design because they would have the requisite design expertise. IICs would provide expertise and services to relieve their clients of the burden of making uninformed decisions just like consultants and counselors in other domains do today. Some forms of such support activity exist in organizations today. One example, from studies on collaborative work practices with computer-aided design (CAD) users, is the role of “gardeners” (Gantt and Nardi 1992; Nardi 1993). Gardeners serve a formal support role focused on providing expertise and services to improve the productivity of a group of end users that employ the same system or program in their job. In the context of CAD work, gardeners assume responsibility for writing CAD macros and programs, researching new tools for end users, and mediating between end users and system administrators. Gardeners help end users with hardware and software configuration, maintenance, and upgrades. These are similar to the activities that IICs might perform in a broader context. The functions performed by IICs are envisioned to be multifaceted. In some respects, they would be analogous to independent insurance agents or financial planners. The growth of new types of investment instruments and strategies has complicated personal investment choices. With the need to tailor these choices to specific circumstances, individuals have sought out financial planners to assist them in customizing investments that reflect their future and current needs, abilities, and level of risk-taking. The IIC would perform comparable tasks in designing a personalized “portfolio” of information products and services for their clients. The IIC would resemble a combination of consultant, planner, and broker of corporate and personal information products and services. The IIC might also perform functions analogous to those performed by interior designers, architects, and counselors in organizational and time-management skills, who work toward personalizing their client’s environment. In this context, IICs would be working with clients to achieve greater levels of productivity along with a deeper sense of image, style, and comfort. At a deeper level, IICs might perform functions analogous to those performed in personal growth, coaching, and clinical counseling. At this level, IICs would examine the personal goals and problem areas of clients. They would use this information to construct and tailor a personal interface that would promote the goals of the individual client and respond in ways that assist the client in meeting specific needs. Psychological assessment instruments may be developed to assist IICs in identifying a client’s needs and goals to guide the construction of personalized custom interfaces. At this level, IICs would design interfaces to motivate, amuse, or sympathize with clients. Some existing interaction concepts seem to have the potential to incorporate these characteristics. For example, learner-centered systems have enormous potential to foster self-esteem and a sense of accomplishment. ## 9.4 Summary and Conclusions This paper describes the maturation of HCI as a progression from support of basic usability needs to support of higher-level human needs and goals. The field of HCI has already moved significantly beyond issues of basic usability. Work in collaborative and organizational interaction has received increasing interest for the past several years. As the evolution toward an ubiquitous computing environment becomes realized, HCI design will continue to broaden in scope by addressing a wide range of interaction design issues. Addressing this broad set of issues will move HCI toward holistic and individualized interaction designs. Holistic interaction designs will provide interaction environments that foster motivation, personal growth, and emotional health; address individual differences; and promote effective habits, as well as meet basic usability needs. The progression to holistic interaction entails change. Major movements in the manner in which HCI is practiced may facilitate this progress. The broadening set of issues addressed by HCI will increasingly be external to engineering, and, consequently, a large part of HCI design will be performed external to engineering. This separation from engineering will generate momentum toward uncoupling the design and development of the human interface from that of the functional technology. Object, component, and distributed computing technology provides a step toward achieving this uncoupling. This capability combined with the large array of information device, service, and content choices, and the demand to satisfy individual needs and preferences will spawn a new industry of information-interaction counselors (IICs). The IICs will address the broad range of factors needed for holistic interaction design. They will advise individual and business clients on their information needs and generate customized interfaces to meet these needs. Two factors will drive the demand for customization. One will be the fragmentation of customer demand across the wide range of available information-based devices and services. The second will be the increased need and desire for individual expression stemming from the seamless integration of computing technology into the environment and everyday experience. In the future, information-based technology will be highly integrated with the rest of the environment. As such, the work of the IICs will tend to overlap with other disciplines that deal with how people can better interact with and experience other people, the environment, or situations. These disciplines will work together to broaden holistic interaction design beyond a discipline specific to interacting with computing technology. A general holistic interaction design approach will emerge in which people’s interaction with the totality of the environment, of which computing technology is only a part, is considered. The maturation of HCI presented in this paper is a progression toward meeting increasingly higher-level human needs and goals with computing technology and with respect to people’s individuality. As our reliance on computers has increased, their effect on our individuality has been a prominent factor in the evolution of our fears and trust in them. Consider the following change in perspective. Following the introduction of computers, people increasingly worried about becoming “just another number” in an impersonal electronic database contained within an unapproachable machine that was employed by uncaring bureaucrats. Within this database individuality would be meaningless and personal identities would be lost in a sea of arcane numbers, decipherable only to an unforgiving authority. Computers would foster impersonal relationships, and the characteristics that made us unique would be overlooked, creating an anonymous and highly depersonalized society. Today we are faced with data warehouses, data mining, and marketing techniques that are designed to exploit our individuality and individual preferences for goods and services. These technologies have enabled our individual choices to be heard and respected—and to be influential in establishing product, service, and lifestyle trends. The data that we thought would depersonalize us has instead defined us. Today we are concerned that too much individual knowledge and data about us are available and that the machine has invaded our individuality rather than stripped us of it. In a broader context, Nehamas (1997) describes Heidegger’s beliefs about technology’s impact on each individual’s reach as follows. “Technology turns what had been prerogatives of the few into the necessities for the many. The power over nature that technology gives each individual is translated, in political terms, into the power within society that democracy allows us. Both technology and democracy place individual human beings in the center of the world.” ## References Alexandrov, A.D., Ibel, M., Schauser, K.E., and Scheiman, C.J. (1998). Ufo: A personal global file system based on user-level extensions to the operating system. ACM Transactions on Computer Systems, 16, 3, 207–233. Butler, K.A., Esposito, C., and Hebron, R. (1999). Connecting the design of software to the design of work. Communications of the ACM, 42, 1, 38–46. Caputo, K. (1998). CMM implementation guide. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. Card, S.K., Moran, T.P., and Newell, A. (1983). The psychology of human-computer interaction. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Cerf, B.G. (1997). When they’re everywhere. In P.J. Denning and R.M. Metcalfe (Eds.), Beyond Calculation, 33–42. New York: Copernicus. Covey, S. (1991). Principle-centered leadership. New York: Simon and Schuster. Davenport, T.H. (1998). Putting the enterprise into the enterprise system. Harvard Business Review, July–August, 12–131. de Baar, D.J.M.J., Foley, J.D., and Mullet, K.E. (1992). Coupling application design and user interface design. Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI’92, 259–266. New York: ACM Press. Dertouzos, M. (1997). What will be. New York: HarperCollins. Dillon, A., and Watson, C. (1996). User analysis in HCI: Historical lessons from individual differences. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 45, 6, 619–637. D’souza, D.F., and Wills, A.C. (1999). Objects, components, and frameworks with UML. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. Eisenberg, M. (1997). End-user programming. In M.G. Helander, T.K. Landauer, and P.V. Prabhu (Eds.), Handbook of Human-Computer Interaction, 1127–1146. Amsterdam: North-Holland. Gantt, M., and Nardi, B.A. (1992). Gardeners and gurus: Patterns of cooperation among CAD users. Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI’92, 107–117. New York: ACM Press. Goleman, D. (1998). What makes a leader. Harvard Business Review, November– December, 93–102. Grudin, J. and Markus, M.L. (1997). The organizational contexts of development and use. In A.B. Tucker Jr. (Ed.), The Computer Science and Engineering Handbook, 1424–1439. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. Hefley, W.E., Buie, E.A., Lynch, G.F., Muller, M.J., Hoecker, D.G., Carter, J., and Roth, J.T. (1995). Integrating human factors with software engineering practices. In G. Perlman, G.K. Green, and M.S. Wogalter (Eds.), Human Factors Perspectives on Human-Computer Interaction. 359–363. Santa Monica, CA: Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. Ishii, H., and Ulmer, B. (1997). Tangible bits: Towards seamless interfaces between people, bits, and atoms. Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI’97, 234–241. New York: ACM Press. Jacobson, I., Griss, M., and Jonsson, P. (1997). Software reuse. New York: ACM Press. Johnson, J. (1992). Selectors: Going beyond user interface widgets. Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI’92, 273–279. New York: ACM Press. Karsten, H. and Jones, M. (1998). The long and winding road: Collaborative IT and organizational change. Proceedings ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 29–38. New York: ACM Press. Kieras, D. (1988). Towards a practical GOMS model methodology for user interface design. In M. Helander (Ed.), Handbook of Human-Computer Interaction, 135–157. Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam. Landauer, T.K. (1995). The trouble with computers: Usefulness, usability, and productivity. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Licklider, J.C.R. (1960). Man-computer symbiosis, 4–11. IRE Transactions on Human Factors in Electronics. Lupu, E.C., and Sloman, M. (1997). Towards a role-based framework for distributed systems management. Journal of Network and Systems Management, 5, 5–30. Mann, S. (1998). Humanistic computing: “WearComp” as a new framework and application for intelligent signal processing. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86, 11, 2123–2151. Maslow, A.H. (1962). Toward a psychology of being. Princeton, NJ: D. Van Norstrand. Nardi, B.A. (1993). A small matter of programming: Perspectives on end user computing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Nehamas, A. (1997). Foreword to A. Renaut. The era of the individual. Translated by M.B. DeBevoise and F. Philip. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Norman, D.A. (1998). The invisible computer. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Pine. B.J. II (1993). Mass customization. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press. Pool, R. (1997). Beyond engineering: How society shapes technology. New York: Oxford University Press. Resnick, M., Martin, F., Berg, R., Borovoy, R., Coletta, V., Kramer, K., and Silverman, B. (1998). Digital manipulatives: New toys to think with. Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI’98, 281–287. New York: ACM Press. Rosson, M.B. (1999). Integrating development of task and object models. Communications of the ACM, 42, 1, 49–56. Rumbaugh, J., Jacobson, I., and Booch, G. (1999). The unified modeling language reference manual. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. Schiano, D.J., and White, S. (1998). The first noble truth of cyberspace: People are people (even when they MOO). Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI’98, 352–359. New York: ACM Press. Schwarz, N. (1998). Warmer and more social: Recent developments in cognitive social psychology. Annual Review of Sociology, 24, 239–264. Shneiderman, B. (1998). Designing the user interface, Third Edition. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. Smith, G., and O’Brien, J. (1998). Re-coupling tailored user interfaces. Proceedings 11th Annual Symposium on User Interfaces and Software Technology, 237–246. New York: ACM Press. Tenner, E. (1996). Why things bite back. New York: Vintage Books. Tomeski, E.A. (1976). The social impact of computers. Proceedings: The Role of Human Factors in Computers, 12–22. Symposium sponsored by Metropolitan Chapter of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society and Baruch College, NY. Wachtel, J.A. (1976). The computer generation: Options, at what cost? Proceedings: The Role of Human Factors in Computers, 107–129. Symposium sponsored by Metropolitan Chapter of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society and Baruch College, NY. Weiser, M. (1995). The computer for the 21st century. In R.M. Baecker, J. Grudin, W.A.S. Buxton, and S. Greenberg, (Eds.), Readings in Human-Computer Interaction: Toward the Year 2000, 933–940. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann. Winograd, T., and Flores, F. (1987). Understanding computers and cognition. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. Wrensch, T., and Eisenberg, M. (1998). The programmable hinge: Toward computationally enhanced crafts. Proceedings 11th Annual Symposium on User Interfaces and Software Technology, 89–96. New York: ACM Press. Wulfman, C.E., Isaacs, E.A., Webber, B.L., and Fagan, L.M. (1988). Integration discontinuity: Interface users and systems. Proceedings of Architectures for Intelligent Interfaces: Elements and Prototypes, 57–68. Monterey, CA. This page intentionally left blank

User Interface Software and Tools This page intentionally left blank