1. Images of Progress The 'Beaufort' radiogram, 1932. Most early radio cabinets used the forms of traditional furniture. From The Cabinet Maker, 27th August 1932. For all its benefits, progress can be a painful and disturbing experience. Our reactions to it are often ambivalent: we want the improvements and comforts that progress provides, but when it forces upon us the loss of things we value, compels us to change our basic assumptions and makes us adjust to the new and unfamiliar, we are inclined to resist it. What is described as progress in modern societies is in fact largely synonymous with the range of changes brought about by industrial capital. Among the benefits are more food, better transport and a greater abundance of goods. But it is a peculiarity of capitalism that each beneficial innovation also brings a sequence of other changes, not all of which are desired by all people so that, in the name of progress, we are compelled to accept a great many distantly related and possibly unwanted changes. The steam engine, for example, brought greater efficiency to manufacturing and greater speed to transport, but the making of it helped turn master craftsmen into wage labourers and caused towns to grow in size and unhealthiness. The idea of progress, though, includes all the changes, desirable as well as undesirable. The success of capitalism has always depended upon its capacity to innovate and to sell new products. Yet, paradoxically, most societies in which capitalism has taken hold have expressed resistance to the newness of things, a newness that was as evident in eighteenth-century England as it is in developing countries today. What is it, then, that has made people in Western societies prepared to accept new products, in spite of the changes they threaten? Since any successful product must have overcome resistance to novelty, it appears to be an axiom that the products of industrial capital aim to create acceptance of the changes they bring about. Among the ways in which this acceptance is won, design, through its capacity to make things seem other than they are, has been most important. Design alters the ways people see commodities. To take an example of this process, we can consider the design of early radio cabinets. When broadcasting began in the 1920s, the first wireless sets were crude assemblies of resistors, wires and valves. Manufacturers quickly realised that if they were to sell radios for people to put in their living rooms, they had to develop a more sophisticated approach to design. In the late 1920s and early 1930s, three basic types of solution were evolved, each one of which presented the same commodity, the wireless, in an entirely dif ferent way. The first was to house the radio in a cabinet which imitated a piece of antique furniture, and so referred to the past. The second was to conceal the radio within a piece of furniture

Centraal Beheer offices, Apeldoorn, Holland, in 1978. The interior of this building was a bare shell, and staff at all grades were encouraged to decorate their workspaces themselves, and even provide their own furnishings if they wished. taste, often through the display of works of art on the walls or shelves. Some office designers have gone further and attempted to extend the licence to express individuality to less exalted staff by encouraging them to furnish their space with objects and pictures of their own. The most famous and extensive version of this principle is incorporated in the Centraal Beheer at Apeldoorn in Holland, designed by Herman Hertzberger. But even in more ordinary offices, the same principle can be seen in the posters, plants, photographs and mascots that staff bring in to decorate and personalise their work spaces. Even if any of these things would have been permissible in the scientifically managed offices of the inter-war years, the interiors were certainly never photographed showing them. Sticking up a poster or watering the plants would have deprived the firm of a few seconds of the clerk's time and, in any case, the expression of individuality was wholly against the 'scientific' principles. An office that could insist that all clerks should use the same style of pen nib and, if necessary, change their handwriting, would have been unlikely to approve of such overt displays of individuality as having pictures around the office. The change from this state of affairs was deliberate and was the result of developments in the theory of management. Its origins were a series of experiments done between 1927 and 1932 by the Harvard Fatigue Laboratory at the Hawthorne Works of the Western Electric Co. to find ways of reducing fatigue and increasing output among a group of six women assembling telegraph relays. The researchers started by introducing breaks and rest periods into the day and changing the work schedules. They found that each new experiment produced better results than the last. In the twelfth experiment, they reintroduced the original working 146

\*The Hawthorne experiments are described in E. Mayo, The Human Problems of an Industrial Civilization, New York, 1933, chapter 3, and in more detail in F.J. Roethlisberger & W.J. Dickson, Management and the Worker, Cambridge, Mass., 1943, in which the principles of the 'Human Relations' school of management are also outlined. day, and output rose yet again, to a level that was higher than at any previous time during the experimental period. Puzzled by these results, the researchers were driven to conclude that the organisation of working, on which scientific management had placed so much emphasis, was not important and that the key to the constant increase in output was connected to the relationship that had built up between the researchers and the workers, as well as in the strong personal attachments that built up amongst the six women, who came to see themselves as a special and privileged group. During the twelfth experiment, the researchers had started to interview the women in some depth about their attitudes to work, and their social life and opinions; this special attention was thought to be connected to the good results being obtained. The Hawthorne experiments and a later experiment on lighting levels for office workers showed that the study of the work of individuals in isolation, as practised in scientific management, was far less important than the study of the workers as part of a social group. The 'Human Relations' school of management that developed out of the Hawthorne experiments emphasised the importance of the worker's relationships with other employees and with management, and was responsible for the changed attitudes towards office environments.\* It had been found at Hawthorne that the women liked having a say in how the experiments were run. The lesson of this for management was that employees who had some influence on the organisation of their work would produce better results. Hence, workers who could influence the appearance of their surroundings could be expected to do better than those in offices of which the appearance and decoration were dictated by the management. On the other hand, an office in which the management had little control over the environment would fail to provide a corporate image, and would look inefficient. The Human Relations principle of management therefore set up some tension in the running of offices, between the need to promote the social relationships of office staff and the need to present a uniform image to indicate efficiency and constancy in the conduct of business. In resolving this and other conflicts in the organisation of offices, post-war furniture design played an important part. With relatively full employment in the three decades after World War II putting clerical workers in a seller's market and encouraging them to change jobs frequently or move to factory work, employers chose a strategy of enhancing the respectability of office work and of making it seem unequivocally middle class rather than offering significantly higher wages. If the characteristics of factory work were routine, servility to the machine and rigorous efficiency, maintained by intensive supervision, the office was to be shown as fundamentally different in its apparently relaxed style of work, the absence of routine, the egalitarian relations and the subservience of machines. Nothing can describe the intended atmosphere better than the word 'friendly' which appeared so ubiquitously in advertisements for office jobs from the 1950s. Even so, office hierarchies had to be preserved to avoid a descent into anarchy and chaos. The entire operation of bureaucracies and administrations depends upon knowing who is responsible to whom; without this certainty, the mainspring of the office would be lost. It was therefore important that the attractive appearance of office egalitarianism should remain no more than an appearance, 147

Post-war Desks and Equipment Office desk manufactured by Herman Miller, designed by George Nelson, 1949. This executive desk was the precursor of many office desk designs for the next thirty years. although for it to have any useful effect, it had to be reasonably convincing. It was the capacity of office landscaping to contain this apparently insoluble contradiction in office work, between apparent egalitarianism and actual hierarchies, that made it so attractive as a system of design. The same ideas were represented in the design of office furniture in such a way as to make them seem not in the least contradictory, but entirely harmonious and compatible. In the context of the plain and utilitarian furniture manufactured in Britain during the post-war years, the desks that were customdesigned for senior staff in prestige offices were very much an exception. They followed high standards of contemporary domestic taste and were finished in light-coloured hardwoods, with rounded corners and legs, while the accompanying chairs were upholstered in brightly coloured materials. The intention was to break away from the drabness of pre-war prestige executive offices, which had usually been furnished in dark-coloured period furniture. This furniture was not produced in any quantity and was purely for managers and senior executives in a few image-conscious offices. The quantity production of prestige furniture for offices began in the United States in the 1950s. The first and best known firm to do this was Herman Miller Inc., which in 1949 commissioned George Nelson to design a desk. The result, a minimal desk on a round-section chromed tube frame, has provided the form for a great many later designs. The original desk, however, was for executives and not for universal office use; it still preserved for the time being the distinction between executive and clerk. The extension of the smart, modern image to all ranks of staff can be explained partly by the demands of apparent egalitarianism and partly by the development of open-plan offices in which diverse

There's a Status desk for non-stop directors, ... for dedicated young executives Advertisement for Hille office desk range, 1961. The problem of office management in the 1960s was to create an illusion of equality while preserving hierarchies. This furniture range, designed by Robin Day, offered one solution. From Design, no. 156, 1961, p.6. and for pretty typists designs would have made it more difficult to sustain the vision of an orderly, and therefore efficient organisation. In Britain, Hille and Co. were the first office furniture manufacturers to make use of design to express the new ideas about management. Hille's innovation was to make furniture which had as much style as that of Herman Miller (whose designs they made under licence in Britain from 1958), and in which the style and quality were identical for all grades of staff, with desks for secretaries having exactly the same standards of elegance as desks for superior ranks. The Hille range of desks thus gave a semblance of common identity and even of equality to everyone in the office, while the differences between the desks made it clear that there were still hierarchies. 149

THE NIS BALL HO Offices of the Liverpool Echo, with the Herman Miller Action Office screen-mounted system, c.1975. Screen-mounted furniture, which enabled hierarchies to be visibly restored in open offices, became increasingly common after about 1970. \*I owe this explanation for the development of screen-mounted furniture to Francis Duffy. \*J. Manser, 'New Thinking in Office Furniture', Design, no.236, 1968, pp. 16-18. It was the need to protect office hierarchies that was responsible for another major change in office furniture design in the 1960s: the introduction of screen-mounted furniture systems. Particularly as offices began to depend heavily on a new group of high-status but non-management professionals, the computer programmers and analysts, the openness of the original landscaped offices began to be broken up into partitioned cubicles formed by the screens.\* While the uniformity of the design of a 'system' marketed by an individual firm maintained the apparent integrity of the organisation, the partitions allowed hierarchical divisions to be re-asserted. The other changes in office desks have been less concerned with their image than with their use as a functional tool, involving their size and their relation to work routines. The enormous rise in rents, particularly in London, over the last twenty years has made office space a very costly commodity; unnecessarily large desks caused wasted space and were an expense to be avoided. The British Civil Service, which occupied much more office space in London than any other organisation, realised that very large savings could be made by economising on desk sizes. The range designed by the Ministry of Public Buildings and Works in the late 1960s aimed to make worktops the smallest convenient size for a single task; if a clerk needed more surface area, more units could be added, creating surfaces in sectors around him or her, a more economical use of the area than that given by a single large rectangular surface. The addition of more standard units, rather 150

Ministry of Public Buildings and Works prototype clerical desk, stage 1, 1968. The design economised on space and, to prevent personal filing, dispensed with drawers altogether, relegating storage to separate open units. than the provision of different sorts of furniture, could also be used to indicate differences in hierarchy - always a problem in the status-conscious bureaucracy of the Civil Service. In the new clerical desks designed in the 1960s, such as the Ministry of Public Buildings and Works prototype, concealed storage space was reduced to the absolute minimum, usually one or at most two drawers, exclusively for stationery. (The MoPBW prototype design had no drawers at all.) All other storage was moved to exposed racks or shelves. This made private storage of papers and files by individuals virtually impossible, so that the desks ensured that the Civil Service practice of forbidding personal filing at all grades was observed. Nevertheless, office workers do need space for personal possessions, shopping, and so on. The first prototype of the MOPBW system provided a cage holding wire shelves, which, by being open, made it impossible to hide files in them. The wire racks, which also left the clerks' personal belongings on public display, were very unpopular, and later versions of the system gave them enclosed shelves, a compromise between office efficienc and the clerks' desire to retain some privacy in the office. The MOPBW clerical desks were purpose-designed objects fitted to the functions of a clerk: although much more attention was given to their appearance, they had close affinities with the purpose-designed clerical desks of the early part of the century. However, as desks for specialised kinds of work, they conflicted with the idea that distinctions between office ranks should be minimised. Although there were still similarities between the appearance and finish of clerical and executive desks in the new Ministry of Public Buildings and Works, prototype clerical desk, stage 2, 1968. Objections about the lack of personal storage space in the stage 1 design led to a compromise with an open shelf beneath the top. 151

Executive Desk, Gordon Russell Series 80, 1977. Storage has been entirely detached from the desk and placed in an optional independent unit, leaving a table with the finish of a domestic dining table. \*D. Rowntree, 'Desk and Chair: Basic Tools of Urban Life', Design, no.105, 1957, pp. 16-21. ranges of office furniture generated out of the study of work functions and marketed from the mid-1960s, there were some very big differences in form. In particular, the traditional executive's desk, which had served the combined purposes of storage, status symbol and defensive bulwark, was replaced in several ranges by a rectangular or round table with no storage facilities whatever. While this represents a victory for management science by finally wresting filing from even management and top executives, and also indicates the greater importance of small meetings in the modern executive's work, the designs did mark a change in image. The desk had become an object with wholly domestic associations and was in some cases quite indistinguishable from a contemporary domestic dining table. The same applied to chairs: back in 1957, Diana Rowntree wrote: "There is difficulty in defining the difference between executive and dining chairs.'\* Although table-like desks might seem to contradict the principles of generating furniture forms out of work studies, this was not entirely so. In all cases, the designers were as much concerned with image as with utility, and the image that mattered for the executive was personality, which has been consistently conveyed by reference to domestic environments, for, in contemporary Western society, home life is the only effective signifier of personal authenticity. We can see evidence of this in the way that politicians have to publicise details of their family lives, and in the ubiquitous framed photographs of wife and children, positioned on the executive's desk so that not only he but also his visitors can see them. Office equipment also went through radical changes in appearance in the 1950s. Office typewriters, which had changed little in appearance since the last century, underwent a similar redesign to that which had already been given to some portable machines. From about 1950, almost all office typewriter manufacturers gave their machines light-coloured, all-enveloping steel cases which concealed the mechanism and attempted to give some elegance to the overall proportions. Some manufacturers had anticipated this general change, notably Olivetti, who had employed Marcello 152

Advertisement for Adler Typewriters, 1960. Advertisers stressed the change that the new designs were intended to bring about in typists' self-image. From Office Magazine, September 1960. Below: Olivetti Lexicon 80 typewriter, designed by M. Nizzoli, 1945. Olivetti was the first manufacturer to make the standard office typewriter into an object of high style. Bottom right: Remington Standard typewriter, 1950. Light colour and a faired casing gave the machine some elegance. Nizzoli to redesign their office machine, the Lexicon, as early as 1945. According to the advertising, the typewriter ceased to seem like a machine and became instead an instrument on which the typist, rather than being a mere operative, could reveal her talents in a virtuoso performance. If part of the point of being a secretary or a typist was not to be seen as a manual worker, then it was clearly important that typewriters should not look like machines, but should convey a more respectable and less oppressive image. The apparent demechanisation was made more complete in electric typewriters. Although they were in production from the 1930s, electric typewriters did not come into widespread use in America until the early 1950s and in Britain until the late 1950s. Although the electric typewriter is a more complex machine than the manual version, it is less mechanical for the operator, as it responds to the most sensitive touch: it has more of the qualities of an instrument than any manual typewriter. In their styling, electric typewriters have received more attention than manual ones. The most famous electric typewriter, the IBM Executive, with its fixed platen, had the least resemblance to a machine, while its two-tone finish and rounded form, the result of Eliot Noyes's design consultancy to IBM, make it closer to table-top art. More recently, a new image for high technology, one which is unconnected with the industrial world, has been established. Technological design for space exploration has provided a new set you are the artiste Your touch on the keys, your virtuosity produce the accomplished results which ensure your Chief's applause" and i universal ovation! ADLER IS THE INSTRUMENT OF YOUR CHOICE Constructed with the supert technical skill and craftsman ship that ensures your com plete confidence at the over ture" and "finale" of each working day it is therefore no

Above: IBM Selectric Typewriter, designed by Eliot Noyes, 1961. Even greater attention was given to electric typewriter design than to that of manuals. Right: Olivetti 'Summa Prima' adding machine, 1960. The blue plastic case was a contrast to the black metal covers of the pre-war machines. From Design, no. 144, p.60. \*Ettore Sottsass Jr interviewed by Stephen Bayley in BBC 'Horizon' programme Little Boxes, 1980. of references, so that, for example, a black finish on a machine no longer signifies factory conditions, but high prestige and sophistication. Business machine manufacturers almost universally stopped using black finishes in the 1950s, but the recent reappearance of black for typewriters, such as Olivetti's Lexicon 83, and other equipment suggests that the meaning of the colour is no longer what it was. Duplicating machines, adding machines, addressing machines and even staplers have all received cosmetic treatment, normally by being enclosed in pressed steel or moulded plastic covers and given bright or light colours. Advertising has played less and less on the cost-cutting, labour-saving aspects of the machines and has emphasised instead what a pleasure it is to work in the company of such attractive objects. All this has minimised the effect of working in a factory and increased the sense of being engaged in an enjoyable activity. That designers themselves were aware of the changes in meaning that they were being called upon to create was revealed by the remarks of the Italian designer Ettore Sottsass Jr about his design for the Olivetti typist's chair, of which he said in an interview: 'I thought that it can be a little bit humoristic, to get away from this idea that the secretary has to sit on a mechanism. So that's a little bit a Mickey Mouse object. . ." The falsity of the illusion about office work has nowhere been greater than with the computer and its progeny, the microprocessor and the word processor. Although the computer has been responsible for some of the dullest and most monotonous work in the modern office, it has received more attention from stylists than any other machine and has attracted the most glamour. So successful has the packaging of the computer been that it has spawned a whole aesthetic, which has been applied to many domestic products, most of which, like the washing machine, have no connection with the computer beyond the incorporation of a 'programme'. The success of computer styling has not been confined to the extent of its influence, but has also created great commercial ben-

IBM 3667 Communication Terminal, 1974. The clean look of computer styling offered the illusion of a new, glamorous kind of work. ## O Below: Olivetti Z9 typist's chair, designed by Ettore Sottsass Jr., late 1970s. Designs like this intentionally brought wit and humour into office furniture and equipment styling. Right: Olivetti Lexicon 830L portable electric typewriter, 1978. In the late 1970s, the colour black returned to office equipment styling, signifying not faulting efficiency, as it had in the 1920s, but sophisticated advanced technology. efficiency all helped to persuade people of the importance placed upon personal relations. Nevertheless, the inescapable reality was that efficiency was the ultimate aim of the office. Though the means of attaining it may have changed, efficiency has been the main consideration behind the selection of every design for every article of office furniture or equipment during the twentieth century. However hard designers tried to blur the distinction between home and work, management aims remained at the root of all design for the office. It may be a compliment to say that an office looks like a home, but it is easy to see why there are few criticisms of a domestic interior worse than to say 'it looks like an office.'

\*These developments are described more fully in A. Forty, 'Wireless Style. Symbolic Design and the English Radio Cabinet 1928- 1933', Architectural Association Quarterly, vol.4, no.2, Spring 1972, pp.23-31. \*Some ideas about Utopian imagery were suggested by W. Benjamin in 'Paris-the Capital of the Nineteenth Century', reprinted in W. Benjamin, Charles Baudelaire: A Lyric Poet in the Era of High Capitalism, London, 1973, pp. 155-177. The Radio 'Easy Chair', 1933. A few manufacturers went for outright disguise by incorporating their sets in other kinds of furniture. From The Cabinet Maker, 25th February 1933, p.417. that served some entirely different purpose, like an armchair. The third, which became more common as people became familiar with radio and found it less disturbing, was to place it within a cabinet designed to suggest that it belonged to a future and better world. Each design transformed the original, 'primitive' wireless out of all recognition. The three approaches evident in these radio cabinets, the archaic, the suppressive and the Utopian, have recurred so often in industrial design that they might be said to form a basic grammar or repertory of design imagery.\* Where twentieth-century design happens to have been dominated by the Utopian images, eighteenth-century manufacturers relied heavily upon the archaic model in their efforts to overcome resistance to innovation\*. To describe design as an activity that invariably disguises or changes the shape of what we take to be reality runs contrary to many present-day platitudes about design, in particular the belief that the appearance of a product should be a direct expression of the purpose for which it is used, a view embodied in the aphorism 'Form Follows Function'. The logic of this argument is that all objects with the same use should look the same, but this is patently not the case, as a glance at, say, the history of ceramics will show: cups have been produced in an endless variety of designs. If the only purpose of a cup was to
