6. Design in the Office \*On the relationship between office buildings and management theory see F. Duffy, 'Office Buildings and Organisational Change', Buildings and Society, edited by A.D. King, London, 1980. The Sociology of Office Work In modern industrial societies, the majority of people work in factories and offices, places that have acquired quite unmistakeable design characteristics, above all because of their nature as instruments of management. Not only has the design of the buildings and of their internal organisation been arrived at to suit the purposes of the managers, but so too has the design of the interiors and of all the furnishings and equipment.\* Whether in the factory or the office, design has been used to represent ideas about the nature of work and about the behaviour expected of people doing it. It is the presence of such ideas in the design of working environments and equipment that makes it easy to see why similar forms for objects, furnishings and decor would not have been welcome in the home. This chapter concentrates exclusively on design in offices during the last century. Over that time, the changes in office environments have been more pronounced than those in factories, and the ideas that management has tried to represent to office workers through design have been more various and more complex. Design in offices has been used to resolve, or at least calm, anxieties and conflicts that have been set up by the introduction of new theories of management and by uncertainties about the status of office work in relation to other occupations; in both cases, the results have been much more successful than the open exercise of authority. Over the last century, clerical workers, who make up the majority of those employed in offices, have formed an increasing proportion of the total occupied population. Nevertheless, their status and rewards have deteriorated. In Britain, until the last quarter of the nineteenth century, clerks were almost all men, many of whom enjoyed quite a high status through regular contact with their employers, by the trust that was often placed in them, and because their wages were generally not less than those of the most skilled of the working class and could be very much more. But though clerks had a degree of respectability, they rarely earned enough to live up to the standards considered appropriate to the middle class. This was one of their most common grievances, to which the employers' customary reply was that middle-class respectability was an additional benefit of being a clerk and, far from requiring a higher salary, was in itself a form of reward (though one that cost the employer nothing). Underlying this dispute was the ambiguity of the clerk's status: was he or was he not middle class? Notwithstanding his modest wages, the clerk was not seen by the working classes as one of their number. But equally, the 120

\*The sources of this account of clerical work in the nineteenth century are F.D. Klingender, The Conditions of Clerical Labour in Britain, London, 1935, chapters 1 and 2; D. Lockwood, The Black Coated Worker, London, 1958, chapter 1; and G. Anderson, Victorian Clerks, Manchester, 1976. 'Elbowing Him Out.' The arrival of women in offices, shown in this cartoon of 1900, did much to depress the status of male clerks. From The Shorthand Writer, 1900. \*Klingender, pp. 58-98; and Lockwood, pp.72-94. secure and established middle class of employers and professional men did not see him as belonging with them. The uncertain standing of the clerk accounted for much of the social discomfort experienced by the fictional Mr Pooter in George and Weedon Grossmith's The Diary of a Nobody and has survived to some extent to the present. In insurance offices and banks, the clerks were better paid and had higher status than their counterparts in business counting houses, railway companies and solicitors' offices. Clerks in the superior category were generally involved in the whole sequence of office work and have thus been compared to industrial craftsmen before the division of labour, as they were responsible for all the stages of a transaction and were able to control the rate at which they worked. The lower category of clerk was usually responsible for fewer stages and had less control over the way he worked. The disparity between the two categories was acknowledged by contemporaries and meant far more in social terms than the differences in the grades of clerical workers today. By the turn of the century, office work and its status had changed in various ways. As the quantity of trade increased rapidly, offices had to expand and employ a higher proportion of clerks to senior staff, thus reducing the clerks' chances of contact with their employers. With the introduction of education for all from 1870, the number of potential clerks increased, as middle-class children no longer had a monopoly of reading, writing and arithmetic, the basic skills of the clerk, and working-class children could compete for office jobs. The introduction of the typewriter in the 1880s brought women into offices to operate it, and, from the 1890s, their number grew so rapidly that by 1911 women constituted a quarter of all clerical workers. Their presence further increased the labour supply and, because women had lower status than men in any occupation and worked for lower wages, further depressed the status of clerical work. In the early twentieth century, the amalgamation of many banks, insurance companies and merchant houses again increased the size of offices and consequently the proportion of clerks in them; the chances of personal contact with employers became even less. The combined effect of these changes was to make the clerk's job seem more lowly, and even the distinction between superior and inferior clerks was eroded, leaving them all merged into the same general class. As their social position declined, so, too, did their earnings compared to those of other workers, notably manual workers whose relative incomes increased over the first half of the twentieth century, a development that accelerated during and immediately after World War II. By the 1950s, many factory workers were earning more than office staff.\* Roughly simultaneous changes took place in the United States in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, although the decline in the relative wages of clerical workers was much more pronounced, since the wage differential between clerks and manual workers had originally been much greater. The erosion of the status of clerks was more noticeable in the United States than in Britain because the changes that were made in the organisation of offices happened on a more comprehensive scale, and rather earlier, in America. As the scale of office business increased, it became subject to the principle of division of labour that had already been

The Time Clock, 1911. This American advertisement implied that office and shop floor staff alike should be subject to the same timekeeping routine. From The Factory, January 1911. \*On the history of clerical work in the United States, and the introduction of scientific management into offices, see H. Braverman, Labor and Monopoly Capital, New York & London, 1974, chapter 15. \*For the history and development of scientific management, see Judith A. Merkle, Management and Ideology, Berkeley, 1980. Points out your Unprofitable Employes Most employes mean to be on time. If they come late one morning they in tend being on time the next; but exper ience shows that it is the same old story over and over again with the tardy ones. The only way to make employes appreciate the value of lost time is to let them pay for it themselves. With an INTERNATIONAL TIME RECORDING SYSTEM you can stop losses through late coming and early leaving--and you can do even more: You can sift out the etherent employes from the inefficient, because late-coming and early-leav ing are twin brothers to mefficiency: the habitual late-comers and early-leavers do not work so well as those who come at the appointed hour and work until quitting time. International Time Recording Systems are fairest to the employe because they make him his own time-keeper. He is protected against any injustice in figuring time. His record is always ac cessible for verification when he calls for it. International Systems are preferred over all others at the ratio of mine to one-that is, 90% of all the time recorders now manufactured in this country are Internationals. Tell us what your present time-keeping system is we'll suggest a better one with International Time Renders Ask for literature. Our corps of time-keeping experts is at your service. The two-colored ink ribbon device, by which the records of late arrivals are automatically printed in a different colored ink, has been held by the United States Court to be covered by our patents and therefore can only be furnished by this company. The International Card Time Recorder Punctuals in Blue Lates and Irregulars in Red The International Dial Recorder Punctuals in Green Lates and Irregulars in Red INTERNATIONAL TIME RECORDING COMPANY LONDON OFFICE International Time Recording Co. 151 City Road, London, E. C., England of New Terb Lock Box 970 ## BERLIN OFFICE International Time Recording Co., . b. H. Endicott, N. Y. 135-136 Alexandrinenetr, Berlin, S. W. Germany applied in factories. From the beginning of the twentieth century exactly similar processes of management and rationalisation began to be applied in offices: clerks were divided into departments, each of which carried out one stage of the work process, and every clerk in a department did the same work. With departments connected only by the flow of work, the American office of the early twentieth century came to resemble a factory, at least in its organisation. The clerical worker, instead of being the equivalent of a craftsman, with responsibility for the whole of a transaction, lost this control over his work, and became no more than a process worker. Perhaps the most potent sign of the clerk's reduction to the level of a factory worker was the appearance of the time clock in offices in the first decade of the century.\* The departmentalisation of large offices seems to have become general both in America and in Britain in the early years of the century and it opened the way for the application of the techniques of scientific management, that had been developed in America and were later adopted in Europe.\* The history of scientific management goes back to the 1880s, when Frederick Taylor began his studies of factory work. He realised that wasted movements, misdirected effort and badly designed tools and equipment prevented most workers from operating with maximum efficiency. If these things could be overcome and the worker could be taught to operate in the most efficent way, his output (and the firm's profits) would 122

\*One of the first manuals recommending scientific management in the office was Walter D. Scott, Increasing Human Efficiency in Business, New York, 1911. \*W.H. Leffingwell, Scientific Office Management, Chicago, 1917, p.5. Adjustable Desk for Typists, c.1918. The caption to this illustration explained 'To work standing for short periods of time is found to relieve fatigue. With the chair and desk raised, the change from a sitting posture can be made almost instantly.' From L. Galloway, Office Management. Its Principles and Practice, New York, 1919, pp.192-193. increase. Taylor assumed that there was an optimum method for each job and that the task of managers was to discover 'the one best way', record the time it took and set it as the standard rate. For the Taylor system to work, the labour process needed already to have been divided into stages, for it depended on perfecting each worker's handling of a single task; Taylor believed that a worker who had to perform too many tasks would never reach the optimum rate at any of them. Taylor's work had become known in the 1900s, although his first popular work, The Principles of Scientific Management, did not appear until 1911. By then, manuals on the scientific management of offices were already being published in the United States.\* Scientific management set out to reduce each clerk's work to a single task, such as opening the mail, unpinning the remittance or invoicing the order, so that each could be studied with the aim of reducing it to its essentials, which could be carried out using the minimum of time and movement. Truly amazing results were promised: correspondents who had previously managed with difficulty to handle 20 letters per hour through the day found themselves able without strain to deal with 60 per hour, while the rate of opening letters was increased from 100 to 300 per hour when the process had been analysed and the correct method taught to the clerk.\* Scientific management was said to make workers happier through the discovery that they could work more efficiently, although the primary motive was to get more work out of office staff for the same or very little more pay. Managers were advised to cultivate friendly relations with their staff, to drop casual hints about how much more work one was managing to do than another, to chart the production of each worker and offer gold stars to those who exceeded the weekly norms, and to set up, in a spirit of healthy fun, office competitions to see who could achieve most in a week. A similarly indirect approach went towards the interest that scientific managers took in workers' health and welfare: fatigue was widely acknowledged to be a cause of poor work and was accounted for by such doubtful physiological theories as the buildup of toxins in the body. Its elimination would maximise efficiency Figure 20. (a) Adjustable Desk Stenographer Sitting The dish and her are pwet ja as she prefers Figure 29. (b) Adjustable Desk-Stenographer Standing To work standing for short periods of time is found to relieve fat gue With the chair and desk raised, as shown above the change from a sitting posture can be made almost instantly

\*L. Galloway, Office Management, New York, 1919, p.75. Below: High-backed roll-top desk in use in an American office, c. 1900. The desk in the centre allowed the clerk privacy and some freedom in how he organised his work. Right: Roll top pedestal desk. The standard late nineteenth century desk, with a large amount of filing space. From Montgomery Ward & Co. catalogue, 1895, p.609. and therefore profits. At the same time, though, the reduction of fatigue could be calculated to appeal to the worker; new designs of furniture and equipment were introduced to office workers as improving comfort rather than profit. Because, for example, it was recognised that changing position at work helped to reduce fatigue, a special desk and chair were designed, the main virtue of which was that the typist would waste a minimum amount of time changing from one position to another. Scientific management continued the erosion of the office worker's status, which had already been undermined by the division of labour. Even management theorists acknowledged what had happened. One of them wrote in 1919: 'Much of the routine of the office employee resembles in one respect that of the factory.'\* By 1920, the organisation of work in large, scientifically managed American offices had become indistinguishable from that in many factories, though with a different product in the shape of words and numbers written on pieces of paper. The development of the office desk and of other office furniture and equipment needs to be seen against this background of the deteriorating status of the clerk and the pressure from management to increase efficiency. The standard nineteenth-century clerk's desk had a high back with pigeon-holes and drawers in it, and sometimes a roll top. The supporting pedestals contained drawers down to floor level. The other common pattern of desk had a sloping top to support ledgers, at which the clerk could work standing or sitting. A clerk seated at a high-backed desk could see his work in front of him and a little to either side, but he could not see ahead beyond his desk, nor could anyone else see what he was doing without coming to look over his shoulder. Such a desk assumed that the clerk was responsible for its contents, and for his work; it represented a small private domain, perhaps with a roll top that could be closed down at any time to secure its privacy. From his desk, the clerk could collect and deliver office papers as his own pace of work required them to be moved around, and he could file papers as he chose in the drawers and pigeon-holes. Such a desk encapsulates the responsibility, trust and status given to some clerks. To the supporters of scientific management, the desk had great significance as the main piece of equipment

YWAÂ¶MO MANUZZA WALLI TWARMOD 30223MALIJA EXTIMLI Clerks in a London Insurance Office, c. 1900. The flat-topped desks with racks for ledgers gave the clerks some privacy and autonomy at their work. \*J.W. Schulze, The American Office, New York, 1913, p.62. \*Schulze, p.63. used by the clerical worker, and it was the first item in the office to be redesigned in the interests of greater efficiency: 'The desk is the most used piece of furniture in the office. The office employee is at it constantly. The highest type of working efficiency in a desk is obtained when the desk itself is so constructed and so arranged that it doesn't in the slightest degree interfere with the progress of a person's work, but on the other hand aids it in every possible way.\* First the pedestal bases of the desk were replaced by legs, so that there was a clear space of eight to ten inches between the bottom drawer and the ground. This was to make cleaning easier and prevent the harbouring of dust and germs, an improvement equally in the interests of employer (because it might reduce the working time lost through sickness) and employee, to whom it offered better health. The other change in design was the elimination of the high back with pigeon holes and the roll top. 'The chief objection to the roll top is that it becomes a receptacle for important papers which are forgotten... Most papers that are filed in the pigeonholes should be placed in the files where they are accessible to everyone who needs them... Moreover the unnecessary height of a roll-top desk cuts off valuable light and air.'\* The loss of filing space in the desk mattered little in the organisation of the office, because the division of labour had made filing a separate activity, with its own department; individual clerks were no longer responsible for filing and storing the papers they worked on. Scientific management had a general, at times pathological, hatred of desk storage space and saw any cavity in the desk as providing an opportunity to hoard vital documents and obstruct the flow of paper through the office. Thus the typical clerk was left with a flat-top desk, with at most six drawers in it. The transformation is illustrated by the new design adopted by the Equitable Assurance Co. during the 1910s. It was described as follows: "The desk finally selected for the use of employees engaged in routine duties is little more than a table with three shallow drawers ... 125

invention of myths. These conflicts arise just as often in advanced societies as in primitive ones, and myths flourish equally in both. In our own culture, for example, the paradox of the existence of rich and poor and of the great inequality between them in a society that maintains a belief in the Christian concept of the equality of all is overcome in the story of Cinderella who is sought out and married by the prince, proving that despite her poverty she can be his equal. Cinderella is a fairy story and thus remote from everyday life, but there are plenty of latter-day variants (e.g. secretary marries boss) which enable people to think that the paradox is unimportant or non-existent. Stories have been the traditional means of conveying myths, but in this century they have been supplemented by films, journalism, television and advertising. In his book, Mythologies, the French structuralist critic Roland Barthes set out to explain the way myths work, and the power they have over the way we think. Taking a wide variety of examples ranging from the language of guidebooks to the imagery of cooking in women's magazines and the reporting of weddings by the press, Barthes showed how these apparently familiar things signify all kinds of ideas about the world. Unlike the more or less ephemeral media, design has the capacity to cast myths into an enduring, solid and tangible form, so that they seem to be reality itself. We can take as an example the common assumption that modern office work is more friendly, more fun, more varied and generally better than office work was in 'the old days'. The myth serves to reconcile most people's experience of the boredom and monotony of office work with their wish to think that it carries more status than alternatives, such as factory work, where there is no pretence about the monotony. Although advertisements for office jobs, magazine stories and television serials have been responsible for implanting in people's minds the myth that office work is fun, sociable and exciting, it is given daily sustenance and credibility by modern equipment in bright colours and slightly humorous shapes, designs that help make the office match up to the myth. For entrepreneurs, the utilisation of these myths is necessary to commercial success. Every product, to be successful, must incorporate the ideas that will make it marketable, and the particular task of design is to bring about the conjunction between such ideas and the available means of production. The result of this process is that manufactured goods embody innumerable myths about the world, myths which in time come to seem as real as the products in which they are embedded. Design's extensive influence and complex nature make it far from easy to deal with historically. The number of industrially made artefacts is infinite, and even the most insignificant seeming design can prove on analysis to be extraordinarily complicated. Rather than making a vain attempt to be comprehensive, I have set out to suggest how the history of the design of any manufactured article might be approached, the kinds of question that could be asked and the answers that the study of its design might yield. Although I have discussed a great variety of articles in the course of this book, many of them in some detail, my choice has inevitably been somewhat arbitrary, and there are many cases where another article would have illustrated the argument equally well. Indeed, it would be true to say that the book could have contained a different set of designs and yet retained its argument intact.

With the disappearance of the roll top, the clerk lost the ability to make his or her desk private: work was constantly exposed to view, and the top of the desk was expected to be in such good order that anything could be found at a moment's notice. In the interest of efficiency, clerks were to be taught to arrange the contents of their desks according to a prescribed system: 'Desk system should be taught to all the clerks, and close watch kept until they have thoroughly learned it. To ascertain just how well they are proceeding, suddenly ask for an eraser or a ruler, or some other item that is not in constant use, and see how long it takes to locate it. If it cannot be located at once, without the slightest loss of time, the lesson has not been learned.'\* Even the drawers were to conform to the system: they should be used in the way that had been established as the most efficient 126 The Modern Efficiency Desk for clerical work, designed for the Equitable Assurance Co., U.S.A., c.1915. From L. Galloway, Office Management. Its Principles and Practice, New York, 1919, p.89. \*Galloway, pp.89-90. \*Leffingwell, 1917, p.11. \*Leffingwell, 1917, p.208. FFIT Figure 16. The Modern Efficiency Desk This desk is little more than a table with three shallow drawers. This makes it impossible for clerks to stow away and so overlook papers. The center drawer holds the employee's tools and the side drawers his stationery. The advantages of a desk of this simple type are that clerks cannot stow within it papers which will be later overlooked. As there is no room for placing current work in the drawers, any tendency to defer until tomorrow what can be done today is nipped in the bud. The simplicity of this equipment reflects the celerity with which business is conducted today. The desk is no longer a storage place - nor even ornamental - but a tool for making the quickest possible turnover of business papers.\* The new design signified the change in the nature of clerical work. Taking away the high back meant that the clerk no longer worked in a private space: the chief clerk or supervisor was able to see whether he or she was working at maximum efficiency. Equally, though, the clerk could more easily see what was going on in the rest of the office (which might or might not be an inspiration to harder work) and talk to those at neighbouring desks. However, conversation in the office was a subversion of the principles of scientific management, interrupting concentration, and most employers made silence the rule in their offices a rule that managers were advised to explain to employees on the grounds that silence in the office would reduce fatigue.\* In some offices, partitions were built between the desks to make conversation impossible, but they defeated the object of better supervision unless the overseer constantly patrolled the office.

\*Schulze, p.64. \*Galloway, p.90. Partitions in an American typing office, c. 1915. The partitions ensured that the typists would not be distracted by gossip and chatter. From W.H. Leffingwell, Scientific Office Management, Chicago, 1917, p. 140. and, since each clerk in a department would be doing the same work, the best arrangement would be equally applicable to all. Once a standard system had been fixed, with, say, the top left drawer for unfinished work and the top right for stationery, the office manager was periodically to inspect the desk drawers to see that it was being followed. In one office, the clerks were awarded points for, among other things, the condition of their desks.\* One reason why desk systems were considered necessary was that the clerk no longer brought work to and from his desk. The movement of papers was handled instead by a messenger, whose efficiency depended on his being able to locate unerringly the papers to be collected on each desk. With messengers or even (in some cases as early as 1915) mechanical conveyor systems for files, the clerk worked only at his desk and no longer had any control over the pace of work. The responsibility and trust given to the nineteenth-century clerk had entirely disappeared: the clerk now worked to a tempo imposed by management at a desk which had been designed and organised to prevent its being in any way a private space. The change in desk design in America during the 1910s both reflected, and was to some extent responsible for, the change in the status of the clerk from craftsman to proletarian - the employer was buying not only his or her time, but also the right to supervise every movement. Even if not all desks were actually used so rigorously, they were marketed as if they could be. The rationally designed desk, 'trained down to fighting trim', provided an image of efficiency to office managers, and the mere presence of 'scientific' desks in an office was a sign of aspirations towards efficient management.\* In British offices, where scientific management never achieved quite the same ruthlessness, the reformed desks adopted in the 1920s, might have created an impression of efficiency, but the extent of the reorganisation of work was probabl less drastic. The impression of efficiency was, of course, greatest if all the desks in an office were the same, or at least designed according to the same system. American office managers were encouraged by the scientific management experts to believe that the standardisation of furniture would have good general psychological effects, as well as improving overall efficiency; it suggested well-ordered methods and demanded of the employee the same care and regard for order: 'Various kinds of shapes, and irregular arrangements of desks, suggest on the other hand that there is no general scheme of supervision that is in harmony with a well-founded principle. There are Mechanical Conveyor for Files, c. 1925. The conveyor removed the need for clerks to leave their desks. From W.H. Leffingwell, The Office Appliance Manual, 1926, p.381. 127

\*Schulze, p.72. \*Leffingwell, 1917, p.20. \*Leffingwell, 1917, p.72. \*Schulze, p.63. \*Galloway, p.91. so many different ways of doing the same thing that each employee feels he is more or less called upon to "improve" upon the methods used by everyone else.'\* Standardisation extended down even to the pens with which the clerk wrote. It was argued that there was no need to have a large supply of different pens to suit the handwriting idiosyncrasies of individual clerks, but that one style of nib would be more economical, and anyone could learn how to use the standard nib within a few days. Thus, even in handwriting, the most individual and personal characteristic left to the clerk, non-conformity was to be eliminated on the grounds that it was inefficient. In theory, scientific management should have been applied with equal force to all grades of office workers. In practice, though, exceptional reasons were found to justify executives having different tools and materials from clerks, although their basic activity in time and motion study terms sitting reading or writing at a desk - was exactly the same. While clerks had dip pens, the executive was justified in having the much more prestigious fountain pen, 'because he is often called upon to write in all parts of the office, where an inkwell might not be handy,' and so was excused the uniformity imposed on the clerk.\* Similarly, the reasons for the redesign of the clerk's desk should have applied with equal force to the executive's desk: filing had eliminated the need for storage, and efficiency demanded that the desk be no larger than was needed for writing on. This was where the principles of scientific management came into conflict with the need to maintain and demonstrate status, a conflict in which 'scientific' principles seem to have been defeated every time. Executives' desks continued to be distinguished from clerical desks in size, capacity and appearance. In their recommendations for executive desks, the management experts emerged with contradictory statements on all three factors. On the size of desks, one writer notes: 'It will be found that for most purposes a 48"³ desk without a center drawer, or with two drawers on either side will be found sufficient. Only in the case of employees charged with executive duties should it be necessary to use large desks.'\* It would seem that the only explanation for this necessity was one of status, as the executive's desk was not for storing documents, and indeed executives were severely warned against the dangers of allowing this to happen. In another office management manual, under an illustration of an extremely capacious desk for the executive, are the following remarks: 'Whatever the form of executive desk adopted, the test of its usefulness is based on its effectiveness as a working tool and not its use as a store house . . . At best, any type of storage system is a passive agent in business, and when the executive's desk takes on this function, it shows that his activities are not in harmony with the modern methods of business.'\* The efficiency experts acknowledged that the drawers of the executive's desk would normally be empty, but they did not dare suggest doing away with them altogether, as was done much later and under different conditions. The rolltop desk, which had been 128

АЗИЗО ЯЗОДИАМ 3TAVIR Figure 17. Standard Double-Pedestal lat-Top Desk A type of desk widely used by xecutives providing free working surface and ample drawer rouri for necessary storage purpos American executive's desk, c. 1915. The type of desk recommended by scientific management for executive use. From L. Galloway, Office Management. Its Principles and Practice, New York, 1919, p.91. Top right: Roll-top desk used by an executive in precisely the way scientific management objected to. From The Factory, September 1912. Below: Flat-top desk with folding cover, c. 1935. A compromise solution to preserve confidentiality without allowing the desk to accumulate papers unnecessarily. From V.E. Jackson, Modern Office Appliances, London, 1936. banished from the clerical office, continued to be preferred by many executives on the grounds that it was useful for protecting confidential papers from inquisitive eyes. In spite of the threat of disorder posed by such desks, the office manuals of the 1910s accepted their use by executives, albeit with disapproval; indeed one compromise solution was developed, a flat-top desk with a roll-top cover. Similar considerations applied to the use of finish, ornament and fittings to distinguish executive desks from clerical desks. Whatever a neo-Georgian desk might do for the prestige of the user, its greater expense, its unnecessary number of drawers and the additional mouldings that acted as traps for dust and disease would have been anathema to the theorists. Scientific management was no less partial in the advice it offered on office chairs. Clerks clearly needed the best design of chair for desk work and this was said to be swivel-based, with a wooden CONSTRUCTrips Right: American tabulating machine office, c. 1915. The woman is sitting on a wooden chair of the kind approved for clerical workers. From W.H. Leffingwell, Scientific Office Management, Chicago, 1917, p.108. 129

Manager's desk of ornate design, U.S.A. mid 1920s. From W.H. Leffingwell, The Office Appliance Manual, 1926, p.734. \*See Braverman for further discussion. saddle seat and a slatted wooden back. If this was actually the chair that best minimised fatigue, it should have been thought equally appropriate for executives' use as well. Executives, however, were recommended to have cane seated chairs, which were said to be superior to wooden-seated ones; status debarred clerical workers from enjoying the same benefits. It was through inconsistencies like this that scientific management revealed itself to be much less than the science it claimed to be, and not so much concerned with overall office efficiency as with changing the character of clerical work.\* Specialised Furniture in the Office \*Leffingwell, 1917, pp. 147-149. Once office work had been rationalised to the extent of allocating particular activities to each department and giving its clerks an identical work routine, there became a case for designing specialised furniture for the various functions. If the desk was thought of as a tool, then each clerical job needed its own tool. From about 1910, specialised desks were designed in increasing variety. One of them was the tub desk, with a top that was not a flat surface, but consisted of a range of trays for filing cards. However, it was in the development of typists' desks and chairs that specialised furniture received most attention. Partly because typing was a new form of office work and partly because it was women who did it, typing was treated from the start as a specialised activity, and typists tended not to perform other functions in the office. In the United States, patents for typing desks appeared in considerable numbers in the 1880s and 1890s; there was lull in applications after the turn of the century, but an increasing number of patents were registered from 1910 until the mid 1920s, when the number again fell off. The second phase of interest in typing desks was closely connected to the introduction of scientific management into offices. Typing had a particular attraction for the scientific managers, because the rate of work could be measured so easily. The techniques for recording typists' output included stroke counters on the machine to record each character typed, and, as typists soon discovered the advantage of using the space bar instead of the tabulator, squared transparent overlays from which the number of square inches of typed material could be read off. Characteristically, even the time required for the supervisor to carry out this action was recorded, and a standard rate was established of six sheets a minute.\*

Tub desks in an American office, c. 1915. The original caption explained, 'Every desk is visible to the supervisor. One clerk with a modern "tub" desk can handle as many cards as with the card drawer cabinet, and thousands of waste motions made by pulling out and putting in the drawers... are eliminated.' From W.H. Leffingwell, Scientific Office Management, Chicago, 1917, p.187. The sunken well desk, the first to be purpose-designed for typing, had been introduced in the 1880s; it provided surfaces at different heights for the typewriter and for writing. The innovations of the 1910s involved making the height of the typewriter adjustable, with the storage drawers redesigned to reduce the time the typist spent reaching for paper and carbons, and devices added for holding the copy or shorthand notes. The fully developed result looked more like a work bench than a desk. At the same time, the sunken well started to go out of favour for stenographers' desks, on the grounds that their work was entirely limited to typing and so there was no need to provide an alternative height for writing. The well desk was gradually superseded by a low level flat top desk. Purpose-designed typists' chairs were apparently not developed until the early 1920s, when use began to be made of the studies of Sunken-well typist's desk, c. 1915. There were many different designs for the two level typing desk. From L. Galloway, Office Management. Its Principles and Practice, New York, 1919, p. 187. 1   
131

Right: The purpose-designed typist's chair was developed through the study of posture. Note the way such studies perceive the worker as a mechanism. From W.H. Leffingwell, Office Management, 1927, p.413. Far right: to factory furniture. From W.H. Leffingwell, The Office Appliance Manual, 1926, p.740. Right: Gestetner duplicating machine, c. 1930. An overtly industrial piece of equipment. From Design, no.40, p.12. sitting posture that had been undertaken in factories. The new chairs were closely based on those designed for factory use: they were made of steel, with adjustable, upholstered seats and backs. Although they were efficient and comfortable, they looked unmistakably industrial. The widespread use of steel for office furniture on the grounds that it was more durable than wood (a questionable argument, since it was true of the material but not of the finish, which was easily scratched or chipped) had the effect of making the office more and more closely resemble a factory. To the theorists of scientific management, this association had great attractions, for it provided visible proof that their methods and analysis applied universally to all kinds of work, regardless of the social pretensions of the workers. The industrial appearance of office furniture and equipment in the inter-war years was not, as has been suggested, the result of an absence of design, or of the failure to conceive of any alternative image, but rather expressed a deliberate intention to associate office and factory. Far right: Powers printing tabulator accounting machine, c. 1935. This equipment could easily be mistaken for a machine tool. 132

Office Equipment \*An extensive selection of interwar office equipment is illustrated in Vincent E. Jackson, Modern Office Appliances, London, 1936. \*Klingender, pp.86-98. Powers-Samas accounting machine office, mid 1930s. But for the clothes of the clerks, there is nothing to distinguish this office from a factory. With the exception of a few articles like dictating machines and telephones, most office equipment before 1940 was overtly mechanical and industrial in appearance. The appearance of the British Gestetner machine, as produced until the early 1930s, was typical: its general form was the result of primarily mechanical considerations, its mechanism was exposed, it was supported on a tubular frame structure and was painted black. This description would equally well fit most other items of office equipment made in Britain and America in the 1920s and 1930s; addressing machines, typewriters and mechanical accounting machines were equally mechanical in appearance.\* There would be little reason to comment on them were it not for the fact that almost all items of office equipment underwent such a major change of image in the late 1940s and early 1950s as to leave little doubt that the original form of these machines was neither 'neutral' nor derived unthinkingly from factory tools and equipment. While the designs may have been determined partly by technical considerations, they nevertheless presented a strong set of associations that, by the 1950s, manuacturers were very anxious to discard. While levels of employment were low, as they were in Britain and the United States in the 1920s and 1930s, offices had little difficulty in attracting staff. In the early 1930s, London employers were able to cut wages, sometimes by as much as half, and many clerks lost their jobs altogether.\* In such conditions, no clerk was likely to make complaints about the work environment. Employers had little interest in making their offices appear other than highly utilitarian, which could be seen as the product either of indifference or of the desire to express efficiency. The early 1930s London accounting machine, office illustrated below, with its heavy industrial-looking machines and plain decor, is distinguished from a factory only by the clothes worn by the clerks. Management aims did not affect the design of all office machines in the same way. The appearance of some, including typewriters and adding machines, changed in a uniform way, but others, like dictating machines and telephones, acquired particular images, for reasons peculiar to their functions.

Underwood LINDERWOOD Underwood no.1 typewriter, 1897. An early typewriter, for use in offices. After their arrival in offices in the 1880s, typewriters became increasingly plain and industrial in appearance. The only embellishments usually to be found distinguished machines from those of other manufacturers or assisted in faster and more efficient typing. The first changes in typewriter styling appeared not in office machines, but in portables. Portable typewriters were originally intended for use by travelling salesmen and other itinerant businessmen who needed to type letters away from the office. From 1920s, however, typewriter manufacturers recognised, as sewing machine manufacturers had done earlier, that there was an enormous market among home users. At first, the association of typewritten letters with commerce resulted in a prejudice against them for personal correspondence, Smith Corona portable typewriter, 1922. Early portables conformed to the industrial style of the office machines. CORON LC Smith & Corona Typewriters Inc 134

\*Business Equipment Topics, vol. LXXVIII, no.4, August 1931, pp.7-8. Raymond Loewy from the model shown on p. 132. From Design, no.40, 1952, p. 13. \*R. Loewy, Never Leave Well Enough Alone, New York, 1951, pp. 83-84. Below: Monarch portable typewriter, 1932. A low-priced portable designed for mass sales. From Business Equipment Topics, 1932. Right: Smith-Corona portable typewriter, 1932. A lightweight machine, clearly directed at the domestic market. From Business Equipment Topics, November 1932. to which the marketing response was that even in the home their proper use was in business correspondence and that typewritten letters to bank managers and the like would achieve better results than handwritten ones.\* The industrial appearance of the machines themselves, which made them seem unattractive in the home, was overcome by redesigning them in a more appropriate form. In practice, there were two approaches to marketing portable typewriters. One was to produce the cheapest possible machine, however ugly it might be, and sell it on its low price. The more common alternative was to produce an attractive object, which cost very little more, especially as the manufacturers were aiming at a very large volume of sales. The machines made by Smith Corona in America from the early 1930s, and Olivetti in Italy from the mid 1930s are good examples: they were slim, cased in a single casting which ran around the keyboard, and finished in light colours instead of the customary black of office machines. The neat and elegant result succeeded in making the portable typewriter a popular object for home use. It was not until later that similar restyling was applied, for rather different reasons, to office typewriters. A very few office equipment manufacturers in the 1930s redesigned their products in a way that anticipated the general changes of the 1950s. Such a firm in Britain was Gestetner, which had made a typically industrial-looking duplicating machine in the 1920s, but in the early 1930s employed Raymond Loewy to redesign it. His new design effectively demechanised it by enclosing the mechanism in a casing. Loewy described the design as a 'face-lift' job, in which he arrived at 'a form which enclosed everything that could be enclosed'.\* Interestingly, it was a face-lift that survived and continued to be used, with a few more wrinkles removed, for Gestetner duplicators until the 1950s. Although Loewy may not have been aware of it at the time, one reason for the continued success of his design lay in its recognition that the operator was not interested in seeing how the machine worked and would very much rather not have known that it was a machine at all. When the typewriter was introduced in the 1880s, shorthand was the available and obvious method to use for taking down the spoken word to be turned into typescript. Shorthand and typing were at once acknowledged to be complementary skills, both of which were necessary for the typewriter to be of real use in the office. Distributors wanted for the "MONARCH PIONEER" wanderd keyboard a At the lowest price in history for a Real Typewriter .... Unlimited Sales Possibilities 135

Instead of discussing every aspect of each design introduced, an approach that might quickly become tedious, I have chosen to treat design in a series of essays, with each chapter developing one theme. As no object is dealt with exhaustively, I must leave it to the reader to pursue the other themes that arise from any particular design. Although the chapters should each stand on their own, they are intended, taken together, to suggest the significance of design in our culture and the extent of its influence on our lives and minds. Pye 'Unit System' receiver, 1922. The earliest radio sets were unashamed assemblies of technical apparatus. SECONDAR W.C.PYE & CO CAMBRIDCE الدووووول www 10

Edison phonograph, 1890s. Despite the carved oak cabinets, the first office dictating machines were not well received. Dictating machines in an American office, c. 1915. Interest in office dictating machines revived through the influence of scientific management. From W.H. Leffingwell, Scientific Office Management, Chicago, 1917, p.132.

\*V.K. Chew, Talking Machines, London, 1967, pp. 14, 26. \*Schulze, p. 36. \*W.H. Leffingwell, The Office Appliance Manual, 1926, p.344. From 1888, however, shorthand skill was threatened by Edison's development of the phonograph and its application as a business dictating machine. The promoters of the early phonograph believed that it would have a very limited appeal in the house, because it was expensive, its sound reproduction was mediocre, and there were problems in the quantity production of pre-recorded wax cylinders to play on it. It was seen as having a much more promising future as an office dictating machine. Edison's system was to rent phonographs to businesses through concessionary companies, which were set up in the United States in 1888, in Britain in 1892, and in Germany in 1894. The phonograph, though, did not turn out to be a success in the office; it was resented by stenographers, and it was too expensive and insufficiently advanced to offer any real savings in the office. Some office phonographs were supplied in elaborate ornamental cabinets, which were presumably part of an attempt to overcome the opposition of office staff and convince them that it was a prestigious piece of office equipment. Such attempts must have had little success, as all the Edison subsidiary companies had stopped promoting the phonograph as a dictating machine by the end of the 1890s and had turned to other markets for it.\* Interest in the dictating machine was revived in the 1910s with the arrival of scientific management, which was attracted to shorthand-typing as an occupation in which it seemed that the separate tasks might advantageously be divided. All the time that a stenographer was taking down shorthand, her typewriter and her typing skills were idle, which the theorists saw as an offensive waste. The dictating machine made it possible effectively to separate the two tasks. Experiments in US government offices were quoted to show that the average cost of producing a letter could be reduced from 4.3 cents to 2.7 cents if dictating machines were used.\* Such examples encouraged some businesses to install dictating machines, which were certainly common in large American offices by the 1920s. The American machines were marketed in Britain and Europe, where they seem to have been less common. The dictaphone enabled the typist to devote all her time to typing, while the executive could dictate at any time that suited him. These inducements, with their cost savings, did not make the dictating machine a popular instrument with either shorthandtypists or executives. Special pleading by the office efficiency experts suggests that they realised how unpopular the dictating machine was, yet wanted to convince people of its value. The arguments put forward in its favour were not financial ones, but were to do with the quality of work. The dictating machine was alleged to encourage inspirational thought and closer concentration, and even improve letter-writing style: 'The dictator is guaranteed certain privacy of thought with the machine acting as a sort of silent, untiring stenographer, with no human failing or variableness with which to reckon. Moreover there is an absence of the human factor element which often intrudes itself between dictator and stenographer, and by reason of a peculiar sensitiveness on the part of the dictator prevents the best expression of his thought . . . Men who formerly dictated stilted letters . . . have been taught by the dictating machine to express themselves lucidly.'\* 137

\*W.H. Leffingwell, Office Management, Chicago and New York, 1927, p.465. Dictaphone dictating machine, early 1930s. This was the machine used by the executive; the cabinet has the form and finish of a piece of furniture, and can be closed to conceal the machine. From V.E. Jackson, Modern Office Appliances, London, 1936, p.274. Such exaggerated praise was intended to overcome executives' worry that dictating machines would make relations in the office impersonal. Shorthand-typists had much stronger reasons for hostility, as one of their two skills was being eliminated and they were left working continuously at their typewriters, often in a typing pool where their rate of work was checked by a supervisor. Underlying all the special pleading in favour of dictating machines was the knowledge that it was not 'an entirely unknown occurrence for dictator and stenographer to engage in conversation entirely unconnected with the business in hand.'\* The chance of cutting out time-wasting gossip made dictating machines highly attractive to office management experts. An additional attraction, and a further reason for hostility from both executive and typist, was that each wax cylinder was accompanied by a card on which the time of dictation and the time of typing had to be recorded; by looking at this, the office manager could find out the speed of production of each letter without having to watch his staff at work. The dictating and typing of a letter, which shorthand had kept as a personal affair controlled by two people, was made by the dictating machine into an impersonal process open to the scrutiny and control of the office manager. Dictating machines in the 1920s and 1930s were very different in appearance from other office machines. They were boxed in cabinets with more obvious style to them than any other piece of office equipment, and the quality of the finish was high. The dictating machine was one of the few office machines used personally by executives, and it therefore needed a superior appearance to fit in with the other furnishings in his office and to avoid damaging his status by making him appear a machine minder. The machine needed to be at his service, rather than vice versa. In any case, the really efficient executive would need to have a dictating machine in his home. 'By placing a machine in his home, [he] may dictate Transcribing machine, in use by a typist, mid-1920s. Unlike the executive's machine, this showed no attempt to disguise its mechanical aspects. From W.H. Leffingwell, The Office Appliance Manual, 1926, p.336. 138

IDISON Edison Voicewriter, magnetic tape dictating machine, 1953. Scrupulous attention to the form of this machine made it suitable for use anywhere. From Design, no.83, 1955. \*Schulze, p.37. \*Manual of Modern Business Equipment: Dictating Machines, 2nd edition, 1962, p.22. overflow work, or ideas that come to him.'\* In order not to affront all the ideas of the separation of home from work, the machine's appearance had to reach the standards of home furnishing. On the other hand, the typist's transcribing machine was an obviously utilitarian piece of equipment. The conditions of clerical employment at the time made it unnecessary to appease shorthandtypists with stylish design to compensate them for the loss of one of their skills. Apart from being unpopular, dictating machines were cumbersome, the quality of the voice reproduction was not good, and they needed the attention of an office boy to reshave the wax cylinders. These disadvantages discouraged much further extension of their use in the 1930s and 1940s. It was not until the 1950s that the introduction of the magnetic tape recorder provided a technically satisfactory machine that was small enough to be easily portable. Nevertheless, the machine still served the same function, and there was every reason for it to be just as unpopular as its predecessor. Realising the large potential market for an efficient dictating machine, several manufacturers employed top designers to style their products, which were therefore closer to contemporary standards of high quality design than other office equipment. The Edison Voicewriter, designed by Carl Otto and marketed from 1953, was widely admired, but other makes were no less highly styled. The great advantage of the miniature tape machine was that it was portable and could be used not only in the office, but anywhere it could be plugged in. (Battery-powered models introduced a little later had no significant limitations on where they could be used.) Outside the office, dictating machines were most often used in cars or in executives' homes, where they raised the same problems as the original dictating machines and portable typewriters. If the meaning of home, as a place distinct from work, was to be preserved, dictating letters at home for later typing in the office was inadmissible. Yet advertisements for dictating machines in the 1950s did suggest that manufacturers expected them to be used in homes - hence the adoption of a domestic image, with smooth plastic casings, pastel colours and delicate controls, which gave dictating machines more affinity with portable radio sets than with other office equipment.

Dictating machine advertisement, England, 1955. As well as the 'a child can do it' copy line, the advertisement implied that dictating machines were likely to be found in homes. From Office Magazine, February 1955. ## MY Y name's Johnny and I'm six. I haven't really got an Agaphone and this isn't my desk But the Agaphone's so easy even I can use it. It doesn't matter if I press the wrong key nothing goes wrong. and if I whisper into it I can hear what I've said all over again as loud as anything My Daddy says the Agaphone is easy to use and he likes it because it saves him lots of time Sometimes he brings it home with him when he's busy and sometimes he uses it in his car. Miss Brown that's Daddy's secretary likes the Agaphone too She says she always gets away on time now and is never late for a date whatever that is If you're as important as my Daddy. I think you should get an Agaphone Agaphone Small, Sound, Simple M. & L. HAYCRAFT LTD. ST. STEPHEN'S HOUSE (Adjoining Scotland WESTMINSTER, LONDON SWI Yard). Telephone WHitehall 9618 9 Up to an hour's dictation with the spools of wire held in a foolproof maga zine. Can be used for con ference recording. Time control enables dictation to be automatically located for playback. Signalling de vice warns the secretary of remarks, instructions, etc., which are not to be transcribed. Key controls are simple and positive. Small and compact. Hand some appearance. Oper ates on any voltage or can be used ×—×“ a car. Domesticating the Office: Post-war Office Design During the 1950s and 1960s, not only did almost every item of office equipment undergo radical change in design, but so too did the entire environment of the office. In many cases, offices began to resemble the contemporarily-furnished homes of the wealthy. The decisive cause of this new image was the change in the market for clerical labour. On both sides of the Atlantic, the steady growth of the service sector of the economy created an increasing demand for clerical workers, while relatively full employment placed offices in direct competition with factories for the same labour. Factory employers tended to respond to these conditions by paying higher wages, but office employers chose in general not to compete on wages, and instead to rely on the greater respectability and 'pleasantness' of office work to attract people who might otherwise have gone into factories. The wage differential between industrial and clerical jobs was gradually eroded, so that by 1968 in Britain, the median earnings of women office machine operators were only 3% above those of semi-skilled factory machine operatives, while in the United States the median earnings of clerical workers had by 140

\*Great Britain, Department of Employment, British Labour Statistics Historical Abstract, 1886-1968, London, 1971, Table 68; Braverman, p.297. \*L. Bruce Archer, 'Honest Styling', Design, no. 108, 1957, p.38. \*Jon M. Shephard, Automation and Alienation: a Study of Office and Factory Workers, Cambridge, Mass., 1971, p.63; see also Braverman. Data processing in a Manchester office, mid 1970s. Although this is called an office, the conditions of work differ little from those of a factory. 1971 actually fallen below those of all other urban occupations except service workers.\* Although there had ceased to be any distinction between office and factory work in their material rewards, there was, however, a major distinction established in the images attached to the two kinds of work. To some extent, this had been achieved through devices such as the relabelling of all clerical jobs as 'secretarial work', but the major cause of the different perception of office work was the radical transformation of the physical environment of most offices. The overtly industrial references of pre-war offices were discarded as wholly unsuitable for the new labour conditions and replaced by a different set of references. Not only did the style of management change, but so too did the ambience, the style of the furnishings and of the equipment. As one industrial designer observed during the 1950s, the main object of office equipment styling became 'to identify the machine as an appliance for the office rather than the factory'.\* Explicit though it was as an aim, finding a suitable image for the office presented considerable problems in practice, particularly since the actual changes taking place in the work of the office were tending in many cases to make it more rather than less like a factory. Automation, and especially computerisation, are often said to have liberated office staff from dull and repetitive work but those advances have not affected all office workers in the same way. Management and executive staff have certainly benefited by the introduction of computers, which can provide them with more recent and more comprehensive data and necessitate their spending less time on interpreting it before making their decisions. But computers have also eliminated a wide middle range of clerks whose job was to prepare business data. In their place, computers have created a heavy demand for clerks to process the data into a form in which it can be used by a computer.\* This group of workers, data processors and key-punch operators, are mostly women and work at a task more monotonous and repetitive than the preparation of ledgers ever was. Because punched cards are an easily visible and quantifiable product, the efficiency of each operator can be watched closely and standards of output set. The work is almost identical to that in many factories and is carried

IBM offices, Segrate, Italy, c.1980. The quality of furnishings, finishes and physical environment in the modern 'landscaped' office is inifinitely superior to that in most office workers' homes. \*Braverman, p.366. out under a similar régime, often in buildings in the industrial zones of cities or their suburbs, or in provincial towns, since corporations have realised that there is no need for their data to be processed in high-rental central business districts. Thus two of the attractions of office work - the metropolitan environment and the chance to mix with other sorts and ranks of office workers - are lost: in location, as well in the conditions of work, much data preparation has become like factory work. The key punch operator has no knowledge of the process in which she is involved beyond what goes on in front of her, and her rate of work is set to a standard created initially by the scale of the investment in the capital equipment. The similarity between this and factory work has been acknowledged by employers as well as employees: "The vice president of an insurance company, pointing to a room filled with key-punch operators, remarked: "All they lack is a chain," and explained himself by adding that the machines kept the "girls" at their desks, punching monotonously and without cease. And the workers themselves are under no illusions about their "white-collar" jobs: "This job is no different from a factory job except that I don't get paid as much," one operator in a large farm equipment office said.'\* Accompanying such jobs have been found all the signs of stress, proneness to sickness and dissatisfaction that are normally associated with assembly-line workers. Computer operations represent office work at its most factorylike, while most clerical work is still concerned with the production of writing on pieces of paper. In the hands of an executive's personal shorthand secretary, who also makes appointments and 142

\*See Interiors Second Book of Offices, edited by J. Pile, New York, 1969; and S. Mullin, 'Some Notes on an Activity', Planning Office Space, edited by F. Duffy, C. Cave & J. Worthington, London, 1976, pp. 16-21 (subsequently referred to as Duffy Cave & Worthington). \*F. Duffy & C. Cave, 'Bürolandschaft, an Appraisal', in Duffy, Cave & Worthington, pp. 68-77; and F. Duffy, 'Bürolandschaft '58-'78', Architectural Review, vol. CLXV, no.983, January 1979, pp.54-58. receives visitors, office work can still be seen as a craft, made meaningful by the personal contacts between people. But the growing tendency in large corporations and government offices has been to eliminate the personal secretary, a position that is regarded as an inefficient use of labour, and to replace her by centralised typing services, so that the executive never dictates to anything but a tape recorder, and the typist never types from anything but a tape. The complete division of labour dreamed of by efficiency experts of the early part of the century has over the last twenty years increasingly become a reality. The striking fact is that while office work itself has become more and more impersonal, the environment of offices has become infinitely more pleasant. Lighting levels and standards of heating and ventilation are now better than most office workers will have in their own homes, while the layout and furnishing of offices and the design of equipment have all been improved to a very high standard. Even if the work made the place seem like a factory, the environment was designed to prove that it was an office. An indication of the significance attached to the office environment in attracting staff is the appearance from the late 1950s of the phrase 'modern office' in advertisements for clerical jobs in London evening papers. Since the 1940s, two important developments in the layout and design of offices have affected working conditions. One was the 'landscaped' office, the other was the 'personalising' of office space. Office landscaping was developed in Germany in the late 1950s as an alternative to the regular rectilinear grids of desks favoured by scientific management theorists. 'Scientific' principles still applied in office landscaping, in that the layout was determined by work flows, though these no longer followed the straight lines that had been assumed to be correct before. Supposedly more efficient than the grid layout, the landscaped office also made distinctions between staff invisible. It gave the impression of obliterating hierarchies; only a trained eye could distinguish between the desk of a manager and that of a clerk.\* Landscaped offices were generally furnished to a very high standard, carpeted throughout, and fitted with furniture which demonstrated taste and style, as well as being efficient. For a manager anxious to prevent his staff from feeling that they had become a clerical proletariat, the landscaped office was a valuable innovation. The egalitarian appearance of the landscaped office brought with it an assumption that good personal relationships among staff mattered, as executives and clerks worked on the same floor in informal contact with each other. Instead of hierarchical layout and imposed silence, the landscaped office allowed the organisation of space to be determined not just by the dynamic of the worker's movements, but partly by his or her own choice, in which relationships with other people in the office might be a factor. In this way, the landscaped office proposed a different standard of behaviour, as the impersonality that had compelled people to wear a mask at work was replaced by a norm based on personal 'openness' and on the understanding of others as individuals. It looked like a place where people got on well together and enjoyed each other's company; since a large proportion of clerical staff in the post-war world consisted of married women looking for relief from the isolation of domestic life, this message carried a strong 143

Director's office, Phoenix Assurance Co., London, c. 1910. This interior is indistinguishable from a room in a private house of the same date. \*R. Sennett, The Fall of Public Man, Cambridge, 1977, chapter 12. attraction. To create an impression of personal friendliness and the absence of oppressive management, landscaped offices used furnishings that suggested domestic interiors (albeit those of the British and American commercial élite) and relied on the image of home as the place in which people are authentically themselves and as the source of all sincere personal relationships.\* Domesticity in the office was not a discovery of the 1950s. Half a century earlier, the offices of some directors and managers had been furnished as domestic interiors, usually in a traditional style, Georgian or Louis XV; what was new was the provision of a high quality environment for everyone below the managing director. The tastefully furnished director's office in the early twentieth century said, 'this is a place in which personal relationships and gentlemanly behaviour matter more than purely commercial ones,' with the implication, 'I am a man of culture and good taste with whom you may be proud to do business.' In the landscaped office, these messages were translated from individual into corporate statements: 'in this office, it is our sensitive understanding of personalities that makes things go,' and 'we are an enlightened 144

Company Secretary's office, Wincarnis Tonic Wine Factory, Norwich, in 1913. At a more modest level, this office, too, had some domestic touches in the pictures on the walls and the upholstered chairs. Director's office, Metal Box Company, Reading, in 1978. The offices of top management use 'personal' features, that are usually, like the patterned upholstery cover, drawn from the domestic sphere, to distinguish the character of their occupants. corporation, for whom you may be proud to work, or with whom you may be proud to do business.' Scaling up the message from an individual to a corporate level lost part of the original meaning, as the environment no longer had anything to say about the worth of the individual. In compensation, it was acknowledged that senior management might still need private offices, and that they should have individual and personal furnishings for them; only thus could they impress other businessmen with their individuality. The senior executive's office would have a very high standard of luxury and comfort, but would also incorporate some notation of the occupant's individuality and
