## 8. Electricity-the Fuel of ## the Future Though they serve the same function, there is all the difference in the world between the two electric cookers illustrated opposite. The Magnet, manufactured in 1914, is a massive cast-iron structure, ornamented with polished mouldings; today, it looks more like a safe than an electric cooker. The top, also of polished iron, has two boiling plates and a grill plate set into it; beneath, there is an oven. The only means of controlling the temperatures of the plates and the oven is by three-way switches, which reduce the current to a half or a quarter. By comparison, the English Electric cooker, manufactured in 1961, is a flyweight. Made of stoveenamelled, pressed-steel panels with rounded corners, the cooker depends for its visual qualities on smoothness and whiteness and on the neatness of the joins. The boiling rings are of a type that heats up rapidly, while the oven and one of the rings have thermostatic switches that can be preset to any temperature. Above the rings is an illuminated control panel with rather more extensive instrumentation than was offered on the Magnet. Arguments about hygiene do to some extent account for the visual and technical changes between the two cookers, but they are by no means the full explanation. A historian of technology might attribute the differences between the two cookers to technical developments in the fifty years between the dates of manufacture: the invention of more efficient means of converting electricity into heat, of better switching mechanisms, and of new methods of forming metal. What this account does not explain is why the inventions should have been made in the first place, or why they should have been applied to the design of electric cookers. Technical innovations do not happen of their own accord: they occur only when somebody sees that there is advantage to be gained from them, and they are applied only when it is in someone's interest to do so. Certainly they cannot be explained simply by reference to the advance of scientific knowledge, an approach represented in the 'march of progress' view that is found all too often in histories of technology. The essential changes are not only that the English Electric cooker was made by different manufacturing methods and incorporated new technology, but that it embodied a set of ideas that were not to be found in the older cooker. To understand those ideas we need to turn to the history of electricity itself. Between the dates of these two cookers, and particularly between the two world wars, electricity production in Britain grew substantially. The growth in demand came predominantly from domestic consumers, who turned to electricity not only for lighting but also for heat, for cooking, for cleaning carpets and for 182

Electricity Supply in Britain \*The main sources of information about the history of electricity supply in Britain are H.H. Ballin, The Organisation of Electricity Supply in Great Britain, London, 1946, and L. Hannah, Electricity Before Nationalisation, London, 1979. Below: Magnet electric cooker, 1914. A massive appliance with only rudimentary controls. Right: English Electric 2034 electric cooker, 1961. Designed by the Design Research Unit. A more compact cooker, with a clean finish and thermostatic controls washing and ironing clothes. These new uses were encouraged by the marketing efforts of the electricity supply industry, which profited from the extra revenue and took a great interest in the development of appliances. In Britain, electricity was first generated for sale in 1881.\* The pioneer public supply, at Godalming in Surrey, was used exclusively for lighting, but the enterprise did not survive for long. The Electric Lighting Acts of 1882 and 1888 established legal arrangements for the production and supply of electricity, and by the early 1890s, a number of supply undertakings were selling electricity. Because the Acts had made it illegal to export electricity across local authority boundaries, the undertakings were all local, and the majority of them were run by municipalities. Almost the entire demand for electricity resulted from lighting, whether for the streets, for public and commercial buildings or for homes. The cleanliness and brilliance of electricity compared with gas made it easy to develop the demand. It soon became clear, though, that the sale of electricity exclusively for lighting caused serious problems in the economics of production. As the demand for lighting is limited to the hours of darkness, particularly the evenings, the necessary generating capacity remained idle for a large part of each day. To explain the relationship between the actual demand and the potential demand that could be serviced, Colonel Crompton, the engineer for the Kensington Court power station, introduced the term

\*United Kingdom Department of Energy, Digest of United Kingdom Energy Statistics, 1980, Table 73, p. 103. Building Domestic Load \*Journal of the Institution of Electrical Engineers (JIEE), vol. XXIV, 1895, p. 10. 'load factor' in 1891. This is the ratio between the actual amount of electricity supplied during a period of time - a day, week or year to the amount of electricity it would have been possible to supply at maximum output throughout that period: in theory the highest load factor would be 100%, which would be virtually impossible to achieve in practice. At present, the British national load factor is just below 60%.\* The load curve for the Kensington Court station showed that even in December, the month of greatest demand, the load factor was only about 20%, a level that was typical of stations supplying electricity for lighting alone. Such low load factors concerned the industry because of their effects on the economics of production. There are two components in the cost of producing electricity: the running costs of fuel and wages, and the capital costs of the plant, generating sets and supply cables. Until recently, the capital cost has been the larger of the two, and it continues regardless of the amount of electricity generated. To meet all its customers' demands, an electricity supplier has to install sufficient generating capacity to meet the peak load, even though the plant may have to stand idle for long periods when there is no demand. In the Kensington station in 1890, with an annual load factor of only 13%, the plant was idle 87% of the time. Had the industry ever developed a satisfactory method of storing electricity generated outside the peak, the uneven demand would not, of course, have been a problem. Low load factors wasted capital and made the electricity that was produced extremely expensive, as the entire cost of the plant had to be covered by a very small total sale of electricity. Unlike ordinary commodities, for which the cost could be reduced by increasing the demand and selling more, increased demand for electric lighting would only make the situation worse, since the increase would invariably occur at the peak and require still more generating capacity. The answer to the problem lay in improving the load factor by building up a demand for other uses of electricity throughout the day. The search for alternative uses was to become a major theme in the history of electricity supply. In his presidential address to the Institute of Electrical Engineers in 1895, Colonel Crompton outlined some of the ways in which the demand for electricity could be diversified. Principal among the possible uses of power were factories, traction for trams and trains, and cooking, heating and other domestic purposes. 'We not only desire to have the output of our generating station more evenly distributed throughout the 24-hour day, so as to fill up the valleys and reduce the peaks of our daily diagram, but we also wish to improve the summer diagram as compared with the winter one... 'The great disparity between our winter and summer loads is due to our geographical position, and will always exist so long as the major part of the energy we supply is for lighting purposes, and the obvious remedy is to encourage its use for motive power and for heating and cooking; and to me at the present time it appears a far easier matter to educate the public to the advantages of using electricity for heating than to induce them to use motive power to any considerable extent. For this reason I have persist ently advocated the perfecting of electric heating and cooking appliances.'\* 184

Load factor curve, Kensington Court Power Station, over 24 hours. The thick line was for 6th November, 1890; the thin line for 2nd December, 1890. From Proceedings of the Institute of Civil Engineers, vol. cvi, 1891, p.7. 1522 30 40 50 60 80 80 100 110 120 10 20 30 40 SO 60 70 80 90 100 110 1 The initiative for domestic applications of electricity thus came from the supply side of the industry, and although domestic use took several decades to reach the scale Crompton had envisaged, it continued to be much discussed by electrical engineers. Contrary to Crompton's anticipation, the industrial and traction uses for electricity were the first to develop and, by 1900, were already beginning to bring about an improvement in load factors. For several reasons, domestic load increased much more slowly and, even in 1914, was still negligible. The high price of electricity and the considerable cost of wiring a house restricted the clientele to the well-to-do, and even those who could afford the expense were dissuaded for such reasons as incomprehension and fear of electricity, and the fact that it compared badly as a form of domestic energy with gas, which was much more widely available. However, the domestic use of electricity was so attractive to supply engineers because of its likely effect upon load factors that it was well worth their while to try and overcome the drawbacks. Both industrial and traction loads had the disadvantage that they had their own peaks, the industrial load during weekday mornings and afternoons, the traction load on weekday mornings and evenings. Although they helped produce a very much more even load curve than lighting on its own, neither use produced much demand for electricity at night or at weekends. Worse still, industrial and traction uses combined with lighting to produce an even higher peak load in the late afternoon of winter weekdays. Domestic demand for electricity was expected not only to add a more even load throughout the day and the week, but also, if anything, to peak at times when other demand dropped. Electricity consumed when people got up in the morning and cooked their breakfasts would precede the peaks of traction and industrial power, while the midday dip in industrial power would be filled by the cooking of lunch; cooking and heating in the evenings and at weekends would also occur outside periods of industrial demand. Electric fires used for occasional heating on cool summer evenings would help fill the seasonal drop in demand, but were not expected to add to the winter peak, since it was anticipated that electricity would always be too expensive to use for continuous heating. 185

Benjamin West: Etruria, oil painting, 1791. West's painting of Wedgwood's factory transforms it into a scene in the ancient world. \*Hugh Honour, Neo-Classicism, Harmondsworth, 1968. fashionable for cultured aristocrats from all over Europe to travel to Rome to view, purchase and, in cases of extreme enthusiasm, excavate classical antiquities.\* Whether the objects of the search were classical or English antiquities, the motives were similar. The study of the remains of the past provided inspiration for how the present could be. The paradox of eighteenth-century taste - that an age which was so fascinated by progress was at the same time devoted to the study of the far distant past - was expressed in all the artistic products of neo-classicism. These were not slavish reproductions of antiquity: they used imagery and forms from the past but were intended to express modern sentiments. Sometimes the effects seem perverse and contradictory. Dr Johnson described contemporary life in poems which closely imitated those of the Roman poet Juvenal in form. New buildings, such as the country houses of the late eighteenth century, made use of the forms and motifs of antique architecture but had internal planning and organisation designed to serve decidedly modern purposes. To popularise the scientific knowledge of the day, the physician and scientist Erasmus Darwin did not use the plain language of science, but wrote a classical epic poem, The Botanic Garden, which was published in two parts in 1789 and 1791, and was a great popular success. Darwin deliberately described science in classical metaphors and images: the power of the steam engine, for example, was described in a long and elaborate metaphor as equivalent to the strength of Hercules. The result now seems perverse and artificial, but the popularity of the poem 15

\*See especially the following papers and the ensuing discussions: W.R. Cooper, 'Domestic Electricity Supply (including Heating and Cooking) as Affected by Tariffs', JIEE, vol. XLII, 1908-09, pp.26-48; H.W. Handcock and A.H. Dykes, 'The Present Aspect of Electric Lighting', JIEE, vol.XLIV, 1909-10, pp.57-73; H. Gray, 'Electric Heating as Applied to Cooking Apparatus', JIEE, vol. XLVII, 1911, pp.249-263; T.P. Wilmshurst, 'Commercial Aspects of Electric Cooking and Heating', JIEE, vol. LI, 1913, pp. 180-194. During the years 1905-14, a great deal of attention was given by supply engineeers to the potential of domestic demand and its likely effects upon the load factor, and to the development of appliances, without which there could be no domestic consumption of electricity. Cooking and space heating, both heavy consumers of current, were thought to provide the most promising means of building up domestic load. Engineers who believed in the future of domestic demand (and by no means all of them did) recognised that to attract consumers to electricity, cookers and heaters needed to be reasonably efficient and, above all, to demonstrate a superiority over gas.\* Anticipating a rapid growth in domestic consumption, a number of entrepreneurs began to make electrical appliances in the years before 1914. Most of the appliances were produced by handcraftsmanship, and as there were many manufacturers and few domestic consumers, it is likely that only minimal quantities were made of any design. By 1914, however, an enormous variety of "Magnet" Electric Heating and Cooking Appliances. CAREFUL attention to even the most minute details in design and manufacture has resulted in the "Magnet System being universally recognised as the "best of all Electric Heating and Cooking Apparatus All "Magnet" Kettles, Irons, etc., are fitted with easily replaceable heating elements. "Magnetâ„¢ Electric Fire. Panel Type H1910 77/6 "Magnet" Electric Fire. Rod Type Radiator and Hot Plate. ## H1950 H2160 ... 110/- Hot Plate detachable and provided with a separate switch. 80/ Electric potato peeler, 1914. Although clearly made for the catering trade, this and other electric-powered machines were recommended for domestic use. From M. Lancaster, Electric Cooking, Heating, Cleaning, etc., 1914, p.286. "Magnet Electric Kettle. Useful alike in Drawing Room or Kitchen. H5308 2-pint 21/ (Polished Copper). H5309 3-pint ... 27 (Polished Copper). Can also be supplied Nickel-Plated. "Magnet" Domestic Iron. H5840 4 lbs. H5842 6 lbs. 12'6 15/- If supplied complete with three yards flexible Cord and Adaptor. 1 each extra on above prices. Advertisement for Magnet electrical appliances, 1914. This shows the very extensive range of small electrical appliances already available by 1914. From M. Lancaster, Electric Cooking, Heating, Cleaning, etc., 1914. Magnetâ„¢ Electric Toaster. Makes perfect fresh toast on your table. 15/ H5600 Nickel-l'iated. "Magnet Milk Sterilizer and Food Warmer. H5360 1-pint 27 6 Of polished copper, electrically fitted exterior, and best china inner container "Magnet" Electric Toaster. Fitted with sheathed element. giving long lite. able to with stand rough use H5602 Nickel-l'lated 21 186

Electric breakfast, 1914. Electric coffee pot, toaster and egg-boiler in use. The attraction, to supply engineers, of the electrically-cooked breakfast, was that it used power at a time of low demand. From Mrs Lancaster, Electric Cooking, Heating, Cleaning, etc., 1914. \*Maud Lancaster, Electric Cooking, Heating, Cleaning etc., being a Manual of Electricity in the Service of the Home, London, 1914, gives a very full account of the domestic electrical appliances available in 1914. \*See discussion to W.R. Cooper's paper in JIEE (1908-09). \*C.R. Belling, 'Electric Fires and Cookers', Electrical Review, vol. 108, 19th June 1931, p.1048. appliances were available for anyone who could afford them; indeed, almost every type of appliance known to us today could be obtained. There were not only electric cookers and heaters, but kettles, toasters, dishwashers, washing machines, vacuum cleaners, mixers, potato peelers and knife grinders. Uses of electricity which improved the load factor were particularly favoured. So, for example, 'electric breakfasts', which fell outside the main load period, received strong publicity. Some of the appliances originated in the United States, which, partly because gas supplies had never developed to any extent, had advanced further in the domestic uses of electricity, but many of the appliances were British designed and made. On the whole, as electricity supply engineers frequently complained, the standard of design was not high.\* In some cases, such as certain domestic clothes washing machines, the appliances were manual models to which an electric motor had been attached. Some electric cookers had been made by installing electric elements in the cast-iron carcases of gas cookers, while those that were purpose-built often looked very much like gas cookers.\* Even where, as in the case of electric fires, the product was not a direct substitute for a manual or gas appliance, there was rarely much about the designs to indicate their specifically electrical nature, and the level of efficiency was generally unspectacular. The extravagant claims that were sometimes made for the luxury of the all-electric home were hardly justified by the appliances themselves, which could not in any case be put to more than occasional use because of the high price of electricity. By 1914, then, the electric house looked feasible, but the actual proportion of households using electricity was too small to make much difference to the load. World War I was a prosperous time for the electricity industry, since it was called upon to supply power for many of the wartime industries. As shift and, in some cases, continuous working gave very high load factors, there was little reason for the supply industry to concern itself much with domestic consumers. However, peacetime once again confronted the industry with the problems of 187

Electric fire, c.1910. Despite the elegant brasswork, the electrical nature of this product was not exploited in the design. \*B.R. Mitchell & H.G. Jones, Second Abstract of British Historical Statistics, Cambridge, 1971, p.71. \*The development of domestic consumption of electricity is discussed in Hannah, chapter 6; and in D.A. Wilson, 'The Economic Development of the Electricity Supply Industry in Great Britain, 1919-1939', Ph.D. thesis, University of Loughborough, 1976, chapter 5. uneven demand and low load factors. Domestic demand resurfaced as the solution to the industry's problems, but so, too, did the same obstacles to its development, and the fact that no more than 6% of British homes were wired for electricity by 1918 prevented any rapid expansion of supply. In spite of these drawbacks, the domestic consumption of electricity did rise from about 7 kilowatt hours (kWh) per head of population in 1920, to 128 kWh in 1939 and to around 770 kWh per head in 1961. Of all the categories of electricity sales - domestic, industrial, commercial, street lighting and traction - it was domestic sales that increased the most: the proportion of electricity generated that was sold to households rose from 8% in 1920 to 27% in 1939 and to 41% in 1963, figures which fulfilled the ambitions of the early twentieth-century electrical engineers.\* The most spectacular growth, in terms of proportional increase in domestic sales, came between the wars. Although this time has been described as a golden age for the industry, since the potential for expansion was so great, considerable obstacles had to be faced in building up domestic demand.\* Of the obstacles, the high price of electricity was the most serious. The problem had long been recognised as circular: high prices discouraged domestic demand, but the only way to lower costs was to improve load factors, which could only be done by 188

increasing domestic demand. Many engineers argued that the best solution was some form of tariff that would not penalise good customers who consumed large amounts of electricity, but at the same time would not result in losses from supplying households that consumed very little. As tariffs which had a high charge per unit discouraged any increase in consumption, the ideal involved a substantial fixed charge and a low unit price. This system, the 'two-part tariff', was widely recommended; by 1939, it had been adopted by most undertakings across the country. Not only did the two-part tariff promote electricity sales, but, during the interwar years, the relation between the fixed charge and the running costs was such that, if anything, large consumers who used electricity for cooking and heating were slightly subsidised by the many small consumers who used electricity only for lighting.\* Even so, electricity continued to be more expensive than other kinds of fuel. In the 1920s, it was generally too expensive to be considered as the sole means of heating and cooking, and even after substantial price reductions in the 1930s, it still remained generally more expensive than other forms of energy. With no price advantage over other fuels, electricity was most likely to attract new consumers through the merits of the appliances that utilised it. The design and efficiency of electrical appliances therefore became an important element in the promotion of domestic electricity sales. As one supply engineer said in 1922: 'In my view there are two conditions necessary for successful domestic load building, i.e. cheaper current, and cheap and good appliances . . . The best propagandist is a satisfactory service, which cannot be given without reliable appliances.'\* The second problem in building up domestic demand was distribution and wiring. There was no point in offering electricity at even the lowest of prices if there were only a few households in a position to buy it. Between 1918 and 1939, however, the extension of mains supply to both new and existing houses meant that the proportion of households connected to the mains rose from 6% to about two thirds. Commercially, a particularly important factor was the amount of electricity each household could potentially consume. Quite a high proportion of the households wired during the inter-war years were equipped only for lighting. More households had one 5 amp socket into which an electric iron might be plugged, but probably only at most one third of all homes that were wired had more than two electric sockets, and they were principally newly built houses in the upper price bracket.\* The third obstacle to the development of domestic demand, fear of electricity, was not as trivial as it might appear. There are enough stories of superstitions about electricity to make it clear that for many people electricity was far from a natural form of energy. One case, known to the author by hearsay, was of two old ladies who anxiously kept plugs in all the electrical sockets to prevent the electricity leaking out; another old lady was said to be terrified by the installation of even an electric bell lest the workman \*Hannah, p.200. \*J.E. Nelson, JIEE, vol. LXI, 1922-23, p.201. \*Hannah, p.208; Alan A. Jackson, Semi-Detached London, London, 1973, p. 145; D.A. Wilson thesis. be killed in the process. In another case, at a country house where a private generating set was installed, the owner was so apprehensive of the unpredictable powers of electricity that he refused to allow a potential of more than 50 volts. Even in the United States, a case was reported in the 1930s of a woman who refused to use a modern 189

\*C.R. Gibson, Electricity as a Wizard, London, 1929, p. 146; the house concerned was Ston Easton Park, Somerset; Margaret G. Reid, Economics of Household Production, New York, 1934, p.254. \*Quoted D.A. Wilson thesis, p.169. \*Electrical Review, vol.94, June 1924, p.928. \*A.G. Whyte, The All-Electric Age, London, 1922, p.228. electric cooker on the grounds that it was 'just too spooky' and preferred her wood-burning range.\* Ridiculous though such stories may sound, the electricity industry took these fears seriously, recognising that they were one of the major obstacles to the development of domestic demand. Speaking at the general meeting of the Electrical Development Association in 1934, the chairman said: 'One of the greatest bugbears to be contended with in the development of electricity [is] the haunting spectre of fear.'\* To some extent, fears and prejudices could be overcome by education and by rational explanations of the physics of electricity. However, since the fears themselves were partly irrational (and even now are to be found in people who have had the opportunity to learn the rudiments of electricity), no amount of reason could entirely overcome them. A more effective approach was therefore to try replacing the popular idea of electricity as a dark, invisible and lethal force by a more positive image of it as a miraculous source of energy that would take away all the troubles of the world. Propaganda about electricity made much of its being a uniquely 'modern' fuel, and descriptions of electricity promised unheardof benefits that it would bring. For instance, in the Electrical Review in 1924, it was said that: '... with the coming of electricity a new era has dawned. One of the great powers of nature has been tamed and harnessed and trained to the service of man, making life clean, wholesome and simple.'\* Millenarian accounts of the all-electric age were common, as in the following quotation from the 1920s: "˜Of all the gifts that electricity brings, almost the greatest is the relief from the burden of mechanical, monotonous, everlasting toil. Just as our factories have become organised to turn out their product rapidly and efficiently by electrical machinery controlled by man, our homes will be transformed to operate smoothly with the aid of electricity, so that the labour involved in cleaning, in heating, in cooking and in washing and other domestic tasks will be performed by an electrical deputy. The energy thus released can be devoted to the enjoyment of home life, to education, to the cultivation of music and art and the other beneficent recreations for which a measure of freedom is essential. Leisure will cease to be a monopoly of the well-to-do and will extend until it becomes a common possession.\*' Electricity was held to promise a bright, clean, efficient, cheerful, toil-free world; it would make real the visions of Utopias and science fiction. Electrical millenarianism flourished best in prose and films, but the industry did its utmost, through advertising, exhibitions and show houses, to convince the public that electricity was indeed the fuel of the future. Its principal agent was the Electrical Development Association (EDA), an organisation set up under the Electricity Act of 1919 and financed by the supply undertakings. From 1926 onwards, the EDA became heavily involved in the development of domestic demand, and electrical millenarianism, though of a restrained form, played a significant part in its publicity. In the late 1920s, the EDA was publicising electricity with slogans like 'To Electricity belongs the Present and the Future', and 'Science's Greatest Gift to the World 190

Electrical Development Association poster, 1927. Part of the electricity industry's attempt to improve the image of electricity. \*EDA publication no. 611, Service Book of Advertising Blocks, 1927. ## Y FOR HEALTH'S SAKE USE ELECTRICITY \- Electricity'. In 1927, the EDA mounted a campaign to promote the domestic use of electricity under the slogan 'For Health's Sake Use Electricity', supported by posters which illustrated a genie-like spirit and promised to carry out all the uncongenial tasks of the world.\* The emphasis on the benefits that electricity would bring, and on its liberating effects, have been recurrent themes in its advertising, but at no time were they more apparent than in the 1920s, when the problem of overcoming superstitious ideas about electricity was at its greatest. It was also hoped that millenarianism would divert attention from electricity's other drawbacks its high price and lack of superiority over its great rival, gas. The gas industry had the advantage of having been in business very much longer than electricity. Gas had been available in towns in Britain since the 1850s, and the majority of urban houses were supplied with it by the 1900s. The electricity industry therefore had to win its customers away from gas, which was not easy as there was little doubt about 191

1011 CREDA OVEN HOTPLATE GED GRILL Creda electric cooker, 1933. The first model to be marketed with a thermostatically controlled oven, eleven years after 'Regulo' ovens were introduced for gas cookers. the superiority of gas for domestic heating and cooking in the 1920s. Gas was cheaper, with more efficient and better designed appliances. For instance, the boiling plates on electric cookers were notoriously slow and wasteful of heat compared to gas rings. The introduction in 1922 of a thermostatic control, the 'Regulo', for gas ovens gave gas cookers a decided advantage over electric cookers, in which the oven temperature had to be regulated by observation of a thermometer on the oven door and adjustment of the three-heat switch. Thermostatic controls were not introduced for electric cookers until 1933, and even then they were fitted only to the more expensive models. There were thus good reasons why the electricity industry chose to draw attention away from its present weaknesses and instead to emphasise, often in rather unspecific terms, the great benefits that electricity would bring about in the future. For the gas industry, there were great advantages in competing with a fuel that depended so heavily on unfulfilled prospects, 192

\*British Commercial Gas Association advertisement in Mrs. R. Noble, Labour Saving in the Home, London, 1930, p.i. Appliance Design and Images of Electricity for it could offer its own qualities as actual and immediate. The gas industry was able to make much of the contrast between the Utopian visions projected by the electricity industry and its own capacity to offer all its benefits in the present. One advertisement, from a publication of 1930, ran as follows: "The Dream Come True A labour-saving home for every woman now Politicians, social workers, novelists, and journalists continue to paint for us rosy pictures of a future when all houses will be so well equipped with labour-saving devices that we shall just sit round pressing buttons while Robots do everything. But these things are always in the future . . . What the modern practical young housewife wants is not a House of the Future - which never comes, but a House of Today - a home fitted now with clean, economical labour-saving equipment, not a vague dwelling fitted at some future date with appliances not yet invented. The gas industry is making such happy, labour-saving homes possible today in every part of the country, among rich and poor alike.'\* It was statements such as this that exposed electricity's dependence on ideas and potential rather than present realities in its appeal to domestic consumers. It is clear that had every consumer acted with rational economic instincts, the growth in electrical demand between 1920 and 1939 would have been nothing like as great as it was. The high cost of electricity and the fact that electricity was no more efficient than gas for cooking and heating meant that consumers who chose electricity must have been influenced by other reasons than the pursuit of value for money. One such reason was that it was said to be a progressive and liberating source of energy with unlimited future potential. Ultimately, whether or not people gave credence to these claims depended upon what they thought of the appliances that harnessed the energy. The future of electricity therefore depended on improving the design of electrical equipment. For the supply industry, domestic electrical appliances had to meet two fundamental requirements: to be efficient and as far as possible superior to gas appliances, and to convey the idea that electricity was the only modern form of energy. Until the 1930s, most electrical appliances satisfied neither requirement particularly well and gave rise to many complaints from the supply side of the industry. Far from living up to the vision of electricity as a modern source of energy, the majority of appliances on the market in the 1920s looked ramshackle and clumsy. In an electric show house fitted out by Battersea Borough Council in 1927, the appliances that furnished the kitchen were cumbersome and distinctly old fashioned compared with the futurism projected by the EDA, on, say, the cover design of Twentieth Century Cookery, published around 1930. This brightly coloured post-cubist image of the modern electric age could not have presented a greater contrast to the dingy reality of the Battersea Electric House. The problem was to represent some of the qualities of modernity and efficiency represented on the cover of Twentieth Century Cookery in the design of appliances themselves. 193

## E Kitchen, Battersea Electric House, 1927. This kitchen may have been well equipped, but the appliances were awkward and cumbersome. \*W. Wilson, JIEE, vol. LXIV, 1925-26, p.314. \*Political and Economic Planning (PEP), The Market for Household Appliances, London, 1945, chapter 3, para. 115. On the history of the appliance manufacturing industry, see T.A.B. Corley, Domestic Electrical Appliances, London, 1966. \*G. Routh, Occupation and Pay in Great Britain 1906-60, Cambridge, 1965, p. 104. The prices of appliances are derived from those quoted in catalogues and press advertisements. Electric cookers came in for particularly severe criticism for their anachronistic design, which slavishly imitated that of coal or gas ranges. A speaker at the Institute of Electrical Engineers in 1926 complained that ' . . . oven designers are copying an older apparatus the features of which are dependent upon its having to be stoked with coal and placed so that its hot hob can be accessible for cooking utensils.'\* Such backwardness in design was not calculated to lead consumers to believe that electricity was an advanced and superior form of energy. There was little that supply engineers could do about the design defects of electric appliances. Supply undertakings were forbidden by law to do anything but generate and distribute electricity, and the only financial connection between them and the appliance manufacturers occurred when they bought appliances for hiring or retailing to their customers. They had no more influence over the manufacturers than any ordinary retailer, and the supply industry as a whole was able to exert pressure on manufacturers only through the EDA. For their part, the appliance manufacturers had had no great incentive during the 1920s to improve their designs. Throughout the decade, the number of consumers was too small to offer much prospect of mass sales, and the variations in voltage between different undertakings made it difficult to achieve economies of scale in manufacture. The practice adopted by some undertakings of hiring appliances in order to promote electricity sales was said to make them poor customers for improved designs, since they would be required to scrap all their existing stock. As a result, standards of design were low, and the appliances were very expensive. In the 1920s, when the average income of managers and professional men was between Â£500 and Â£700 a year, electric cookers cost upwards of Â£30, a vacuum cleaner around Â£20, and an ordinary electric fire about Â£3.\*

257 20°CENTURY 玄

​Cover of Twentieth Century Cookery. Published by the Electrical Development Association, c. 1930. The image of modernity that the EDA wished to present contrasted strongly with the appliances actually available. \*See J.L. Meikle, Twentieth Century Limited, Philadelphia, 1979, pp. 10-18. EDD 297/1 COOKERY It was not until the early 1930s that appliances began to get cheaper and manufacturers started to pay serious attention to appearance and efficiency. The most important reason why they became more interested in innovatory design was that, as electricity prices began to fall, they foresaw the prospect of a mass market, which would justify a greater outlay on design. There was good reason to think that designs fulfilling the idea already implanted in people's minds by the EDA and others of electricity as the 'modern' fuel, were most likely to attract customers. The selection of 'modern' imagery was also encouraged by the example of American manufacturers, several of whom set up subsidiary companies and factories in Britain in the early 1930s. The more advanced state of the American electricity industry, combined with the earlier discovery by Americans of the commercial value of 'modern' imagery, caused their products to embody explicit images of progress which were imitated by British manufacturers.\* 195

Above: Josiah Wedgwood: copy of the Portland Vase, 1790. The production of the black jasper body was a technical triumph, which Wedgwood publicised by reproducing the famous firstcentury cameo glass Portland Vase. Right: Admission ticket to view the Wedgwood copy of the Portland Vase, 1790. Wedgwood made his successful reproduction of the Portland Vase into a society event. Grack Sheet Sotiv between 12 o'clock and 5. at the time shows that this was an acceptable way of communicating progressive ideas and knowledge. Just as unrealistic was Benjamin West's painting of Josiah Wedgwood's factory at Etruria: women decorators clad as Roman matrons, in languid classical poses against scenes of artistic craftwork, could hardly have been less representative of the actual conditions in the factory, which was renowned throughout Europe for its progressive methods of manufacture and its high degree of separation between the different processes. It was typical of the eighteenth-century approach to novelty that when Wedgwood sought to advertise his technical abilities as a ceramist, he set himself the task of reproducing the Portland Vase, the celebrated piece of Roman cameo glass acquired by the Duke of Portland in 1786. The point of the reproductions was not just that they were as good as the original, but that they demonstrated the sophistication of contemporary manufacturing techniques better than any new and original designs could have done. Unease about progress and a compulsive interest in the past were connected phenomena. In The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire (1776-88), Edward Gibbon described Rome of the second century AD, the Golden Age, as a place of perfect peace and harmony, which was only subsequently disturbed by the introduction of Christianity from elsewhere. Not until recently have historians questioned this idealised picture of the Golden Age and argued that, far from being static, Rome was going through a period of considerable internal change, a view which would not have been well received in the eighteenth century, as it would have deprived antiquity of one of its greatest attractions. To the leisured classes of the eighteenth century, much of the pleasure of studying ancient 16

## Above: Ferranti copper bowl electric fire, Type 1, c.1910. One of Ferranti's early electrical appliances. Right: Ferranti parabolic reflector fire, 1929. This fire offered a theoretically efficient distribution of heat. This model had a Georgian surround. One of the earliest and best-known instances of the radical improvement and redesign of an electrical appliance (in this case an exclusively British product) was that of the Ferranti reflector fire. Dr S.Z. de Ferranti was a man of wide interests and abilities who had been concerned with all sides of the electricity industry. In 1890, at the age of 26, he had conceived an ambitious scheme for supplying electricity to the whole of London from a power station at Deptford which was to have been much larger than any other station planned at the time. Although the station was built, it ran into difficulties and never became the success that was intended. Before World War I, Ferranti had been manufacturing ## RADIANT HEAT IN THE OFFICE Electricity now brings into the office a radiance hitherto unavailable. The Ferranti Fire protects clean heat where it is required and, as everybody knows, fect warm, head cool is the desirable condition, especially in the office. The glowing heat of the Ferranti Fire is gratefi! and comforting two to three yards away.

\*Hannah, pp. 10-12; manuscript notebooks of Dr Ferranti, held by Ferranti Ltd, Holmwood, Lancs. \*The Ferranti Fire, publicity booklet, n.d., p. 14. Far left: Illustration, Ferranti publicity booklet, c. 1930, showing the parabolic reflector fire in use. Left: Berry Magicoal electric fire, The Sundown, 1925. Simulated and electric fires were a longstanding way of giving a familiar form to the invisible source of energy. \*Electrical Review, vol. 114, 9th February 1934, p. 188. \*See A. Forty, 'The Electric Home', Unit 20 of Open University Course A305 History of Architecture and Design 1890- 1939, Milton Keynes, 1975, p.60. electrical appliances, among them electric fires. In the mid-1920s, he returned to the development of domestic load and investigated possible improvements in the design of electric water heaters and space heaters.\* In theory, any electric fire gives 100% efficiency in the conversion of electricity into heat, but there may be big differences in the distribution of heat. Improvements in the design of electric fires did not therefore affect overall efficiency, but simply the way in which the heat was distributed. Reflector fires had been in existence since before World War I, and Ferranti turned his attention to ways of increasing the efficiency of the reflector to radiate a larger proportion of the heat. His solution, a parabolic reflector with a thin wound-wire heating element lying along the focus, shed a warming glow over a large area and helped overcome one of the common criticisms of electric fires: that they gave little visual evidence of heat. Ferranti started to manufacture the fire in 1929 and offered several versions of the basic form, one with a plain surround and another with Georgian trim. In 1931, he introduced a model that could be set into a fireplace, as well as a smaller and cheaper portable model. The Ferranti fire became something of a classic of design in Britain in the 'thirties and was praised enthusiastically by Nikolaus Pevsner in 1937 in his book An Enquiry into Industrial Art in England. Ferranti's publicity for his fire made much of its scientific design: "The remarkable radiation efficiency of the Ferranti fire is obtained by the scientifically correct application of a well-known principle in the projection of heat. . .'\* But as important as its radiant efficiency was its appearance, which, as well as being discreet and tasteful, also had some of the 'modern' and technological qualities attributed to electricity. During the 1930s, other manufacturers became increasingly aware of the importance of appearance in electrical appliances. Discussing the market for electric fires in the Electrical Review in 1934, A. Curwen asked: 'How are we to create this demand for electric heaters? First we must improve their design until they impress by their very appearance - they must symbolise electricity. This is the age of the unorthodox, and I feel that if fire manufacturers departed somewhat from accepted designs, they would find a better market for their products.'\* The appearance of most early electric appliances had taken the form of the object whose function they most closely followed. Electric cookers looked like gas cookers, which in turn imitated coal ranges, and from early in their history many electric fires had simulated coal or log fires.\* These 'traditional' designs arose partly from the unimaginativeness of manufacturers and their designers, but partly from the belief that such familiar appearances would help overcome prejudices against electricity. However, as a result of comments from others in the electricity industry, manufacturers became aware of the discrepancy between the traditionalism of their products and the modern image for electricity that the industry and the EDA were trying to promote. From the early 1930s, the designs began to change in ways that met with the 197

Creda parabolic reflector fire on tubular steel stand, 1935. A 'modern' design for an electric fire. \*JIEE, vol. LXXII, 1933, p.137. Below: HMV Bruton electric fire, 1939. The double parabola of the reflector improved the distribution of heat, and the extensive use of chrome had connotations of contemporary car styling. Right: HMV Lincoln electric fire, 1955. The fins, intended to reflect radiant heat over an even wider area, again gave the fire a 'modern' form. approval of the supply side of the industry. For instance, R.B. Matthews, an engineer who had complained in 1927 about the design of electric fires, found himself able to say of them in 1933, that 'Since [1927]. . . there has been a remarkable improvement, and in many cases there are striking departures from previously accepted principles.'\* Though electricity is invisible, colourless and no more good than bad, the properties ascribed to it were that it was clean, silent, instantaneous, modern and revolutionary. To symbolise these qualities, manufacturers and designers employed 'modern' design, based on the 'Art Deco' style, on the style of the European Modern Movement, or on features derived from automobile styling. Chromium plating and streamlining became the clichés of electrical product design from the early 1930s. Ferranti's fire had made use of some of these features: the chromed surface of the parabolic reflector created its visual effect as well as diffusing heat. Subsequent appliance designs were more aggressively 'modern': for instance, a smaller version of the parabolic reflector fire rested on a chromed tubular steel support that owed much to the furniture designs of the German architect Marcel Breuer or to those of the English firm of PEL; when Walter Gropius, a celebrated pioneer

\*D. Sharp, T. Benton & B.C. Cole, PEL and Tubular Steel Furniture of the Thirties, London, 1977; R.D. Best, Design and be Damned (unpublished typescript), p.136. Sunbeam electric mixer, c.1958. The automobile-derived motifs gave this appliance an up-to-date image. \*H. Dreyfuss, Designing for People, New York, 1955, p.80. Advertisement for electricity, 1980. Electricity can only effectively be marketed through its appliances, and to draw custom, these must be (or appear to be) technologically advanced. In this advertisement, the modernity of the cooker is implied by contrasting it with an obviously antiquated model. From Company, August 1980, pp.66-67. of Modern Movement architecture, came to England in 1934, he chose a fire of this design for his own use.\* Although many electrical appliances continued to have a highly traditional appearance, it was designs such as those of the HMV electric fires, with their strong references to contemporary car styling, that projected an image of electricity as the modern, progressive and liberating source of energy. After World War II, appliances continued to be an important part of campaigns for the domestic sale of electricity, again with designs that conveyed to consumers the image of electricity as the most up-to-date form of energy. Appliances manufactured in the 1950s incorporated the latest features of styling, like the electric mixer with the car headlamp motif at the front and space-ship fins at the rear. Likewise, the English Electric cooker described at the beginning of the chapter contained features (particularly the control panel) that were redolent of the future. Designers have acknowledged that they intentionally used references to cars and aeroplanes in order to convey ideas of progress and modernity. The American industrial designer Henry Dreyfuss wrote in 1955 that the impetus for the changes in the design of modern kitchens had been brought about: "... by two things that had nothing to do with cooking a meal or taking a bath the automobile and the airplane. Actually, the auto and the plane have become symbols of the nation's scientific imagination and a vital part of its psychology, establishing trends and influencing people in everything they buy.'\* In the marketing of electricity, emphasis on the technological futurism of appliances remains important - a 1980 advertisement for electricity featured a cooker, the great efficiency and advanced features of which were brought out by its utter dissimilarity to the older cooker standing by it. Although the symbolism used to express modernity and the future has changed over time as images have been superseded, the idea that electricity will put one into the twentieth, or indeed the twenty-first century has been a constant feature of the design of electrical appliances. This technological futurism, while by no means confined to electrical products, can be explained in them Beauty and the beast. Thankfully, hist that the ty Ergash with fastig anquet fadlahtiol the-thelen.. for! the was the Thank-Lab. hungen warm the walke chal-in at grills alkatr In Suva tal-bak Steamwealth aleat Call in a streh und dog Almaketarstab tits Malbellinking bed in writing by JL. The list COOK Clean and simple 199

Wireless Sets \*A. Briggs, The Golden Age of Wireless, London, 1965, pp.6 and 253. \*PEP report, 1945, chapter 6, para. 155. by the particular problems the electricity industry had in making its colourless, odourless, invisible, dangerous and expensive form of energy attractive to the public. The design of appliances has been one means by which people have received favourable ideas about electricity and formed the desire to use it despite all their prejudices and objections. Wireless sets were the first pieces of electrical equipment to be owned on a mass scale in Britain. In 1922, when broadcasting began, there were 36,000 licences for receivers, in 1931 there were 4.3 million, and in 1939 there were 9 million, enough for almost every member of the population to have access to a set.\* Radio sets were the most popular electrical appliances; the next most widely owned was the electric iron, of which there were estimated to be 6.5 million in Britain in 1939.\* Wireless sets were also among the first electrical appliances to use futuristic design, and, although styles have changed, the same basic imagery has continued. However, radios, unlike other appliances, used little or no current from the mains, and the electricy supply industry did not have the same cause to be interested in their commercial development. The reasons for the introduction of futurist design in wireless sets lay elsewhere and had to do with the ways in which radio as a medium was thought to appeal to the public. When broadcasting was introduced in the 1920s, it was a novelty without parallel and without precedent. Broadcasting brought sounds of the outside, public world into the home much more vividly and immediately than the gramophone, and the unfamiliarity of this experience occasionally had surprising effects on listeners. The wireless set also provided most people's first experience of owning a piece of modern technology and thus carried great weight as a symbol of scientific progress, putting them in touch with changes that they were told that technology would bring in all areas of life. Because of its great potency as a symbol of what life in the twentieth century would offer, radio became one of the most popular metaphors for the changes that technology would bring about in everyday life. It is hardly possible for us today to appreciate the impact of radio, because we have become so used to technical innovation and the claims made for it. The closest comparison might be with the pocket calculator, which has enabled Burndept IV Wireless Receiver, 1924. Most early wirelesses were presented as pieces of technical apparatus. 200

\*For a fuller discussion of wireless cabinet design, see A. Forty, 'Wireless Style: Symbolic Design and the English Radio Cabinet 1928- 33', Architectural Association Quarterly, vol.4, Spring 1972, pp.23-31. Wireless set designed by Sir Ambrose Heal for George V, 1924. In mahogany, with mother-of-pearl inlay depicting a whispering shell transmitting radio waves and a conch shell receiving them. Apart from this discreet symbolism, this cabinet was not recognisable as a radio when the doors were closed. everybody to possess a product of the silicon chip technology which we are told will transform the world out of all recognition. The design of the appearance of wireless sets went through three distinct stages.\* In the years immediately after broadcasting began, the rate of technical development of wirelesses was very rapid, and significant improvements were continually being made in the design of receivers. Customers' attention was focused on the innovations, and they would look for sets incorporating the latest improvements. In these conditions, the buying public was relatively unconcerned about what the receivers looked like and was more interested in how many and what type of valves each model had. In appearance, the earliest sets tended to be rude assemblies of diodes, capacitors and resistors, a form that was in its own way extremely striking but reflected the almost total preoccupation of both manufacturers and public with the technical properties of the apparatus. Some superior models were housed in cabinets, but these, like the one made by Heal's for George V, were not mass-produced and tended to be custom-made by cabinet makers who were independent of the wireless manufacturers. In the late 1920s, wireless-making was a boom industry: hire purchase meant that even relatively poor people could buy radio sets, and it was generally upon radio sets, rather than the cookers and heaters that the electricity industry was so keen for them to buy or hire, that they spent what spare money they had. The wireless, after all, gave pleasure, whereas other electrical appliances only promised efficiency, and even that was doubtful and at a price. In these favourable conditions, the wireless industry grew very fast, and as long as the rate of technological innovation continued so rapidly, much of each manufacturer's appeal to the market depended upon his being able to offer a better set than his rivals. However, around 1929, as the rate of technological advance began to slow down, the superheterodyne receiver offered by one company was no longer very different from that made by any other. ttt 201

\*V. Gielgud, British Radio Drama, London, 1957, p.20; reference to the problem of the confusion caused by radio was made by M. Muggeridge, The Thirties, London, 1940, pp. 44-45. pp. 44-45. In the second stage of development, manufacturers, unable to compete with each other by technical innovation, turned to other means, notably the design of cabinets, to which little thought had been given previously, except in the most expensive sets. The problem that faced manufacturers was what cabinets should look like. There seemed good reason to believe that customers would rather not furnish their living rooms with pieces of obviously scientific apparatus, but what were the alternatives? Most manufacturers began to market their sets in wooden cabinets, which were still usually designed and made by outside firms of cabinet makers and generally resembled other pieces of furniture. But the more far-sighted were not satisfied with these designs. There were complaints that wirelesses could not be distinguished from other pieces of furniture; stories circulated of guests mistaking the radio set for the cocktail cabinet. Some manufacturers therefore began to consider whether there might not be better ways of housing wireless sets, ways that would perhaps fit people's expectations of radio more closely. The problem of the best way of housing wireless sets centered around people's ideas of radio. Although radio was extremely popular, the sounds and voices that it brought into the home could be very disturbing. Early broadcasts exploited radio's unprecedented realism, and listeners were encouraged to sit in a darkened room so that their imaginations would heighten the illusion of reality. The effect of one of the first successful radio plays, Richard Hughes's Danger, was to make listeners feel that, like the characters, they were trapped underground in a mine.\* Yet radio's dependence on convincing its audience that they were listening to reality also made it very confusing. Were listeners really to think that they had Stanley Baldwin or the Hallé Orchestra sitting in their living rooms? Clearly they were not, but the less they believed this to be true, the less they were likely to enjoy radio. The dilemma has been even more of a problem with television, and most people avoid thinking about it by assuming most of the time that what they see on television is reality itself. Listeners in the 1920s and 1930s could at times be very credulous; the outstanding instance of how they could be duped occurred in the United States when Orson Welles's version of H.G. Wells's War of the Worlds was broadcast, and thousands of people who had turned on their sets during the programme fled from their homes, convinced that the Martian invasion was actually happening. In reconciling the illusory reality of broadcasting with its actual artificiality, there was a good deal to be said for the furniture approach to radio cabinet design, since it helped to assimilate the unfamiliar medium into people's homes. A cabinet which harmonised with the domestic furnishings at least helped to make the monstrous unreality of radio seem part of everyday life. Some manufacturers took this approach to its limits, concealing their sets inside articles of furniture which served other functions, like the radio easy-chair illustrated on p.12. Others took a less bizarre course, but kept to the notion that their sets should appear as furniture. This approach, however, did not fulfil the popular idea of radio as the symbol of future progress: it was supposed to represent everything that living rooms, and lives, lacked; sets that simply imitated what was already there could not fully satisfy people's expectations. The solution adopted by one firm, Murphy, 202

MAKING. WIRELESS SIMPLE "Here's my new All-mains, Set!" Well, what do you think of it. It's out standing in design, isn't it? And it's just as outstanding in construction. I can tell you frankly that I've never seen a factory staff more keen to make a good job of this set than my people are at present. And the sales staff too-bursting with enthusiasm to sell it. In fact they are all as keen as I am. Murphy dealers know that this summer is going to be a great success a stepping stone to even greater successes. It you want to be a Murphy Dealer let me know now, while I am adding to the list. Drank Mughn 8. AMLEE. ALRE Charter THE MURPHY TYPE A.3 3-VALVE SCREENED GRID ALL-MAINS RECEIVER SINGLE TUNING CONTROL DIAL MARKED IN WAVELENGTHS Above: Qualery P   
The very perfectly included this report 19 GNS ere with ample med hly pay MURPHY RADIO LTD.. Welwyn Garden City. Herts Ways Garden 331 150 RPHY RADIO Advertisement for the Murphy A-3 receiver, cabinet designed and made by Gordon Russell, 1931. One of the first cabinets that was unmistakably a radio, but which was also designed as contemporary modern furniture. From The Wireless and Gramophone Trader, 16th May 1931. Right: Pye radio receiver, 1930. Pye radios were sold in cabinets that were essentially pieces of modern furniture. They were distinguished by the sunburst motif on the loudspeaker grille. From Wireless and Gramophone Trader, 18th October 1930. \*G. Russell, Designer's Trade, London, 1968, pp. 147-154; and N. Pevsner, An Enquiry into Industrial Art in England, Cambridge, 1937, pp. 103-105. IRRESISTIBLE PREDOMINANT UNIQUE 333 ## PYE TWINTRIPLE PORTABLES which manufactured good quality sets in the medium price range, was to have cabinets that were still furniture, but recognisably modern. Murphy went to one of the leading designers of modern furniture, Gordon Russell, who produced a design that incorporated features from contemporary furniture without being derivative of some other article and was instantly recognisable as a radio set. In people's homes, these cabinets would almost invariably have looked more modern than the other furnishings. For the next twenty years, Murphy continued to have their cabinets designed and made by Gordon Russell, maintaining throughout the principle that the wireless, as a modern invention, should be housed inside a case of modern design that was also a piece of furniture and therefore gave the alien and confusing sounds of radio a place in people's homes.\* Throughout the 1930s, the majority of other manufacturers adopted a similar policy and sold their radios in cabinets that were essentially pieces of furniture, though not all of such tasteful appearance. Some, like Murphy and Pye, laid great stress on the quality of cabinet design, in the belief that sophistication and modernity were likely to attract customers. The convention of housing wirelesses in cabinets that were identifiable as pieces of furniture gave radio an image which, while it might have been convenient, was not particularly true to its nature. One firm that did not follow the convention was E.K. Cole Ltd., which sold wirelesses under the brand name of Ekco. Cole was responsible for initiating what can now be recognised as the third stage of radio cabinet design, in which the imagery of technological futurism (as distinct from the raw technology that was evident in the Burndept receiver of 1924) was introduced to 203

Old couple having tea with Pye radio in the background, c.1935. The radio stands out as the most modern piece of furnishing in this interior. \*Pevsner, 1937, pp. 105-107; also W. Landauer, 'Plastics', Trend, vol. 1, 1936, pp. 75-91. Below: Ekco 313 Radio, 1930. Ekco's first experiment in moulded plastic cabinets. Although moulded in bakelite this design could equally well have been made in wood. From Wireless and Gramophone Trader, 1930. Centre: Ekco M25 radio receiver, bakelite cabinet, 1932. Designed by J.K. White. Although more 'modern', this cabinet was still similar to wooden ones. provide the basis for the design. Although its technical development slowed down around 1930, radio continued for the following decade to be the most universal and available symbol of social change based upon technical progress. People still expected radios to move with the times and characterise the future. This expectation, originally fulfilled by constant improvements in the circuitry of receivers, was transferred into the design of radio cabinets. Cole discovered the potential for visual design to achieve this effect through circumstances connected with the production rather than the sale of wirelesses. Because of problems with the manufacture of wooden cabinets, the firm decided in 1930 to start making cabinets in bakelite.\* This was a recently developed thermosetting plastic which promised to be a very cheap material for cabinets, provided that enough sets were sold in each design to cover the cost of the moulds. For its first two bakelite cabinets, Ekco employed a traditional furniture designer, and the results looked very much like imitation wooden cabinets. The firm then became dissatisfied and decided to employ a designer associated with the Modern Movement, in the hope that something more appropriate to the material might be achieved. Ekco approached the architect Serge Chermayeff, who already had a reputation for his modern furniture, and the set he designed went into production in 1933 as the AC64. Although this design could still have been constructed in plywood, it made rather more of the qualities of bakelite. In the following year, Ekco invited several 'modern' architects to submit designs in competition, and chose to put those by Wells Coates and Serge Chermayeff into production.

## Above: Ekco 74 receiver, bakelite cabinet, 1934. Chermayeff's second design for Ekco, this cabinet was a form that it would have been impractical, if not impossible to make in wood. Right: Ekco AD65 receiver, bakelite cabinet, 1934. Designed by Wells Coates, this was the first of Ekco's bakelite cabinets to break totally with the image of the radio as a piece of furniture. From The Architectural Review, December 1935. Left: Ekco AC64 receiver, bakelite cabinet, 1933. Designed by Serge Chermayeff. A 'modern design, which could still have been made in plywood. Ironically, the mottled brown imitation-wood finish shown here sold better than the pure black bakelite finish. Wells Coates's design, the AD 65, was unlike Chermayeff's designs in bearing no resemblance at all to furniture. Not only would it have been impracticable to make it of wood, but its circular form with chromium plated grille, prominent tuning dial and conspicuous knobs conveyed the impression that it housed a piece of unequivocally modern technology. Where the Burndept receiver of 1924 had been technological in appearance, but not particularly modern, Wells Coates's AD 65 combined an evocation of technology with modernity. Unlike the earlier set, it gave the impression that the experimental stage was over and that it belonged instead to a world that would be made harmonious and comfortable by reliable and smooth-running technology. In its combination of technological sophistication with futurist imagery, the AD 65 was an achievement not previously realised in any radio cabinet design. As long as the use of valves required receivers to be fairly large, the convention of designing radio cabinets as furniture continued, but the introduction of transistors after World War II made great reductions in size possible and revived the problems of what a radio set should look like. As the majority of sets became portable, furniture ceased to have any relevance to cabinet design. Manufacturers cast around for other solutions, and made use, for example, of the forms of light hand luggage. By the 1960s, the majority were using the same set of ideas, though through different imagery, as had been developed by Ekco in the 1920s, and radios began to appear in the form of conspicuously modern objects of technology. Even if not all designs had pretensions to such technical sophistication as the black-anodised boxes of the 1970s, the tendency to adopt advanced scientific imagery has been fairly widespread. The technical developments in wireless design since the 1950s have been minimal, but manufacturers have persisted in making radio sets look as if they were breaking the frontiers of science. Their attachment to this image led to the innumerable designs that imitated the appearance of the apparatus developed for the space programme. This self-conscious futurist symbolism has continued despite the fact that radios are no longer the only pieces of electronic technology in popular possession, nor even, since the 205

\*The account of the history of the Staffordshire pottery industry, and of Wedgwood, is based on the following sources: J. Thomas, The Rise of the Staffordshire Potteries, Bath, 1971; L. Weatherill, The Pottery Trade and North Staffordshire 1660-1760, Manchester, 1971; Wolf Mankowitz, Wedgwood, London, 1953; D. Towner, Creamware, London and Boston, 1978; N. McKendrick, 'Josiah Wedgwood: an Eighteenth Century Entrepreneur in Salesmanship and Marketing Techniques', Economic History Review, 2nd series, vol. XII, no. 3, 1960, pp. 408-433. See also N. McKendrick, J. Brewer and J.H. Plumb, The Birth of Consumer Society. The Commercialization of Eighteenth Century England, London, 1982. Wedgwood: Neo-Classicism in Industrial Production \*See note above. \*Quoted in Mankowitz, p.27. Rome and collecting relics from it was the contact it gave them with a civilisation that had seemingly been stable. Their desire to see classical principles, and classical designs, applied to contemporary life arose partly out of a wish to suppress from their consciousness its disturbing tendency to change. Of course, it can be argued with justification that when, for example, Wedgwood introduced neo-classicism into the design of his pottery, he did so because that style was in fashion. Yet such an explanation is incomplete in that it does not tell us why neoclassicism rather than some other style was the fashion: to answer this and know why eighteenth century consumers preferred neoclassicism to the alternatives, we need to know what it meant to them. Unfortunately, the reconstruction of consumer preferences in the past is a historical enterprise fraught with difficulties and generally leading to unsatisfactory results. Even the evidence of the few consumers who took the trouble to articulate and record the reasons for their choices cannot be wholly relied upon, since they may not have been fully conscious of their motives, or have failed to record them completely. Moreover, we cannot assume that the preferences recorded by one consumer were shared by others, even others of the same class, age or sex. In these circumstances, the best we can do is to indicate the predisposing factors that might have led consumers to act in one way or another at a particular time. In general, the best historical evidence about consumer preferences, at least for the purposes of understanding design, comes from manufacturers, who can, after all, be expected to have had their fingers on the pulse of the market, and we should value their testimony above that of any individual consumer. Josiah Wedgwood's experiences with neo-classicism largely confirm that, among other things, it was the style that made the late eighteenth-century middle and upper classes feel most at ease with progress. In 1759, when Josiah Wedgwood ended five years of partnership with the potter Thomas Whieldon in Stoke-on-Trent in Staffordshire, considerable changes were taking place in the English potteries. At the beginning of the century, few workshops had employed more than half a dozen men, and most of their output had been sold locally. By 1750, some potters had increased their sales by extending their markets to more distant parts of the country and so were employing more men in their workshops. By 1769, the average potworks in Staffordshire was thought to employ about twenty men.\* At the end of his partnership with Whieldon, Wedgwood rented a potworks nearby at Burslem and began production on his own, shrewdly recognising the business possibilities open to him. As he later wrote at the beginning of the Experiment Book he started at this date, 'I saw the field was spacious, and the soil so good as to promise ample recompense to anyone who should labour diligently in its cultivation.'\* How Wedgwood went about this cultivation is known to us through the exceptional series of letters that Wedgwood wrote to his friend Thomas Bentley. These letters provide a unique picture of the mind of an entrepreneur during the early stages of industrialisation, revealing the problems he faced and the solutions he 17

Ever Ready Sky Countess portable transistor radio, 1959. The advent of the batterypowered transistor demanded a new image for the cases: many manufacturers chose to imitate light hand luggage. development of the silicon chip and its use in pocket calculators, the most advanced. The effect has been to prevent radio from taking a respectable place in history by trying constantly to convince us that it belongs to an age that we are only just on the brink of entering. The use of imagery to make products appear 'ahead of their time' has been a recurrent and at times thoroughly monotonous feature of twentieth-century design. The reasons are not hard to see for the appeal is exactly the same as that on which all millenarian religions have been based. The attractions of a future from which all present ills will have been eliminated are overwhelming; furthermore it is emotionally very much easier to live in the past or the future than it is to live in the present. The discovery by twentieth-century manufacturers that one of the most effective ways to stimulate the desire for commodities was to suggest that they were the key to a clean, harmonious and comfortable way of life would have come as no surprise to any nineteenth-century revivalist preacher. What, however, would have been a surprise was the entirely novel way in which designers were able to make inanimate objects convey this message without the assistance of words or pictures. The success of design in using the imagery of science and technology to convey a vision of a future free from discomfort and anxiety has been one of the stranger phenomena of twentieth-century society. 206
