se abundant exertions by merchants, manufacturers, and government bureaucrats alike, Europe by the eighteenth century enjoyed a fundamentally new place in the global networks of cotton. Most of the world’s cotton production was still located in Asia, and vibrant cotton industries remained throughout Africa and the Americas, but Europeans now decisively dominated its transoceanic trade. In the New World, they had built a regime for the production of agricultural commodities based on slave labor, a system of production that would ultimately make more and more Europeans into cotton growers, even though little cotton grew on European soil. Strong European states had simultaneously created barriers to the import of foreign textiles just as they built a system for the appropriation of foreign technology. By orchestrating economic processes in Asia, Africa, and the Americas as well as in Europe, Europeans gained the paradoxical ability to direct the global trade in Indian textiles while at the same time keeping Asian cloth increasingly out of Europe, instead trading the products in Africa and elsewhere beyond Europe’s shores. A globalized textile industry had emerged and Europeans, for the first time, had grasped the vast scope of the global demand for cotton goods. What set European statesmen and capitalists apart from their counterparts elsewhere was their ability to dominate these global networks. Whereas trade in Africa, Asia, and the Americas had been characterized by networks fueled by the mutually advantageous exchange of goods, Europeans built transcontinental production systems that exploded existing social relations on their continent and elsewhere. The significance of this early history of global interaction was not global trade as such (which remained of limited quantitative importance to all economies), but instead the reshaping of how things were produced, both in time and in space, and the social and political ramifications of that production.56 India and China, or, for that matter, the Aztec and Inca empires, had not even come close to such global dominance, and even less so to reinventing how people produced things in the far-flung corners of the globe. And yet starting in the sixteenth century, armed European capitalists and capital-rich European states reorganized the world’s cotton industry. It was this early embrace of war capitalism that was the precondition for the Industrial Revolution that eventually created an enormous further push toward global economic integration and continues to shape and reshape our world today. What happened was a swift transition from the older world of cotton—discontinuous, multifocal, horizontal—to an integrated, centralized, and hierarchical empire of cotton. As late as the mid-eighteenth century, it would have seemed unlikely to contemporary observers that Europe, and especially Britain, would very soon turn into the world’s most important cotton manufacturer. Indeed, even in 1860, James A. Mann, a fellow at the Statistical Society of London and a Member of the Royal Asiatic Society, could still remember: Our own condition, at a period very recent, would but ill-compare with the then inhabitants of the New World or of India; our moral condition with all the advantages of climate, was absolutely below the latter, and the position of the manufacturing art in America, at the date of its discovery, or in India, surpassed even that of our woolen manufacture; and to this day, with all our appliances, we cannot surpass in fineness the muslins of the East, or the solidity and elegance of the Hamaca’s, the Brazilians and Carribees were wont to weave. When our people were in primeval darkness, East and West were in comparative light. India…is the source whence we received indirectly our ideas of trade; it was the manufactures of that country, as of China, that inspired the minds of our forefathers with the wish for luxuries according to the received notions of the times. The period in which the manufacture was carried on in India, formed comparatively speaking, the dawning of our day; the sun was then traveling from another and past era in the world’s commerce. The Indian manufacture was the forecast of that light, which, intensifying on its road hither, gained the needful warmth to dispel the early mists of morn, and develop the embryo state; and strengthened by the energy of the European, it has given rise to a new era of commercial splendour never before witnessed.57 As the sun was made to rise over a small part of Europe, as enterprising Europeans sucked the discontinuous, multifocal, and horizontal worlds of cotton slowly into their orbit, they invented tools and methods that enabled them to mobilize land, labor, and markets in the service of a newly and boldly imagined empire. By creating this vast sphere of war capitalism that followed rules so different from the ones in Europe itself, they created not just the conditions for the “great divergence” and the Industrial Revolution but also for a further strengthening of states at home that would in turn become crucial to the creation of the empire of cotton. By 1780, Europe in general, and Britain in particular, had become a hub of the world’s cotton networks.
