 their counterparts elsewhere, controlled many global cotton networks. They had access to uniquely dynamic markets, they dominated the transoceanic trade in cottons, and they had firsthand knowledge of the fabulous potential wealth that could come from selling cloth. The core problem faced by British cotton manufacturers was the difficulty of competing with high-quality yet cheap Indian products. In the course of the eighteenth century, as we have seen, British producers had largely (though not entirely) solved the quality problem by appropriating Indian technology. Expanding output, and lowering costs, proved more difficult: The putting-out networks that British merchants had built in the countryside proved largely resistant to higher production. Work was performed irregularly, additional workers were difficult to mobilize on short notice, and transportation costs rose with the volume of work. And it was difficult to enforce homogeneous quality in products spun and woven on remote farms. With the existing technology and social organization of production, British outworkers could hardly compete with cotton workers in other parts of the world. Indeed, they succeeded mostly only in the protected domestic and colonial markets.9 The main reason for this inability to compete, however, was wage costs. Wages in the United Kingdom were significantly higher than in other parts of the world; indeed, in 1770 Lancashire wages were perhaps as much as six times those in India. Even though by this point improved machinery meant that productivity per cotton worker in Britain was already two to three times higher than in India, that multiplier was still not sufficient to level the playing field. War capitalism had created a fundamentally new set of opportunities for British cotton capitalists, but it had no answer to the question of how to enter cotton cloth markets in a globally significant way. Protectionism had been a workable answer to a point, and was deployed to great success, but the tantalizing possibility of global exports could not be preserved by such prohibitions. What British cotton capitalists needed was a dynamic combination of new technologies to lower costs, the further growth of elastic markets that already had begun to expand on the tails of British expansion, and a supportive state with the ability not just to protect global empire but to transform society in Britain itself.10 Since labor costs were the primary obstacle to grasping the new tantalizing opportunities, British merchants, inventors, and budding manufacturers—practical men all—focused on methods to increase the productivity of their high-cost labor. In the process, they effected the most momentous technological change in the history of cotton. Their first noteworthy innovation came in 1733 with John Kay’s invention of the flying shuttle. This small wooden tool in the shape of the hull of a ship allowed weavers to attach the weft thread and then propel it to “fly” from one side of the loom to the other through the warp threads. The shuttle doubled the productivity of weavers. At first it spread only slowly, but its spread was unstoppable: After 1745, despite resistance from weavers who feared for their livelihoods, it was widely adopted.11 This tiny piece of wood propelled in novel ways prompted a cascade of further innovations that would gradually but permanently change cotton manufacturing. The spread of more productive weaving techniques put huge pressure on spinning, as ever more spinners were needed to supply one weaver with sufficient yarn to keep the looms working. Despite more women in ever more households working longer hours on the spinning wheel, the supply was insufficient. After Kay’s invention it took four spinners to supply one weaver. Many artisans tried to find ways to circumvent this bottleneck, and by the 1760s productivity increases became possible with James Hargreaves’s invention of the spinning jenny. The jenny consisted of a hand-operated wheel that would rotate a number of spindles within a frame, while the spinner would use her other hand to move a bar back and forth to extend the thread and then to wind it on the spindles themselves. This machine was at first able to spin eight separate threads, later sixteen or more, and as early as 1767 it had tripled a spinner’s speed. It spread rapidly, and by 1786 there were about twenty thousand in use in Britain.12 As early as 1769, however, spinning was already seeing further improvements thanks to Richard Arkwright’s water frame, a machine that anticipated Greg’s mill by relying on falling water. Consisting of four rollers that drew out the cotton strands before a spindle twisted them into thread, it allowed for continuous spinning, and unlike the jenny, which had at first been mostly employed in people’s homes, the water frame required larger amounts of energy, thus concentrating production in factories. A decade later, in 1779, Samuel Crompton’s mule was the capstone of these inventions, combining elements of the jenny with those of the water frame (hence its name). The mule was a long machine with two parallel carriages: Bobbins of roving (lightly twisted cotton fibers) lined one side, and spindles ready to accept spun yarn lined the other. The exterior carriage, mounted on wheels, was pulled out about five feet, stretching multiple lengths of roving simultaneously. The number of rovings spun depended on the number of spindles mounted to the mule: Although two hundred was the norm in the 1790s, the number would climb to more than thirteen hundred over the ensuing century. The stretched roving was then twisted into yarn and wound onto the spindles as the carriage was pushed back in. Unlike with the water frame, which operated continuously, yarn was produced in five-foot bursts, but was stronger and finer than yarn produced on water frames. The mule was first powered by water (which remained the dominant source of power until the 1820s), but later mostly by steam engines (which James Watt patented in 1769).13 With spinning no longer a laggard, pressure shifted back to weaving. First came a vast expansion of home-based weaving. With new machines and an abundant supply of thread, this was a golden age for weavers all over the Lancashire and Cheshire countryside, as tens of thousands of cottagers spent endless hours on their looms working up the rapidly increasing output of British spinning factories. While Edmund Cartwright had patented a water-powered loom as early as 1785, productivity improvements in weaving at first proved modest, and technical problems with power looms great.14 Britain’s growing class of manufacturers, despite issues with looms, were acutely aware that these new machines allowed them to increasingly dominate the one node in the global cotton complex whose control had eluded them: manufacturing. In eighteenth-century India, spinners required 50,000 hours to spin a hundred pounds of raw cotton; their cohorts in 1790 Britain, using a hundred-spindle mule, could spin the same amount in just 1,000 hours. By 1795 they needed just 300 hours with the water frame, or, with Roberts’s automated mule after 1825, only 135 hours. In just three decades, productivity had increased 370 times. Labor costs in England were now much lower than in India.15 Prices for British yarn fell accordingly, and soon were lower than those manufactured in India. In 1830, British cotton merchant Edward Baines cited the price of one pound of Number 40 yarn (the number reflects the quality of the yarn—the higher the number, the finer the thread) in England as 1 shilling, 2.5 pence, while in India the same quality and quantity of yarn would cost 3 shillings, 7 pence. Manchester spinners McConnel & Kennedy reported that the prices for its high-quality 100-count yarn fell by 50 percent between 1795 and 1811, and, despite various ups and downs, continued to fall further throughout the nineteenth century. While yarn prices, especially of fine yarns, fell the most rapidly, the cost of finished cloth also declined. A piece of muslin in the early 1780s cost (in deflated prices) 116 shillings per piece; fifty years later the same piece could be had for 28 shillings.16 The resulting boom in cotton manufacturing was unprecedented. After nearly two centuries of slow growth in Europe, British cotton manufacturing expanded by leaps and bounds. Between 1780 and 1800, output of cotton textiles in Britain grew annually by 10.8 percent, and exports by 14 percent; already in 1797 there were approximately nine hundred cotton factories. In 1788, there had been 50,000 mule spindles, but thirty-three years later that number had increased to 7 million. While it had been cheaper to produce cotton cloth in India before 1780, and its quality had been superior, after that year English manufacturers were able to compete in European and Atlantic markets, and after 1830 they even began to compete with Indian producers in India itself. Once Indians began using British-manufactured yarn and cloth, it signaled to all that the world’s cotton industry had been turned on its head.17 As ever larger numbers of cotton factories began to dot northern England to accommodate the new spinning and weaving machines, it might come as a surprise that the inventors, who had enabled this departure, had started in distinctly unspectacular ways. They created a world radically different from anything ever seen before without recourse to theoretical science, often even without much education. They were skilled men in tiny workshops, with little formal education. Among the inventors, Kay came from the most prosperous family, as his father was a modestly successful woolens manufacturer. He might have received some formal education in France. Hargreaves, on the other hand, was a handloom weaver from Blackburn, who probably never had any formal schooling—much like Arkwright, the youngest of seven children born to poor parents, who learned how to read first from his uncles and then educated himself. Crompton grew up in dire poverty: After his father died, Crompton began to spin cotton, perhaps as early as age five, while his mother tried to make ends meet by spinning and weaving. All four were tinkerers, people who breathed and lived with their machines, trying to solve practical problems with simple tools and insights that emerged from their day-to-day efforts to improve production.18 But they were far from local heroes. Their innovations sometimes even brought down the wrath of their neighbors, who dreaded the job losses the innovators caused. Fear of mob violence drove Kay and Hargreaves away from the places they had made their inventions. Neither translated their inventions into wealth; after losing their efforts to defend their patents, they lived modestly. When Hargreaves died in Nottingham in 1778, he owned little more than a prize from the Society for the Encouragement of Arts and Manufactures, and his children were destitute. Only Arkwright profited from his invention—establishing cotton factories in numerous locations. Yet a rapidly growing number of British manufacturers did embrace the new technologies, a British state valued them so highly that it criminalized their export for nearly half a century after 1786. From then on, technical progress became a constant: Profits were made by increasing the productivity of human labor. This would in fact become a defining feature of industrial capitalism. These new machines, the “macro inventions” celebrated by historians Joel Mokyr, Patrick O’Brien, and many others, not only accelerated human productivity, but also altered the nature of the production process itself: They began to regulate the pace of human labor.19 Dependent on central energy sources and requiring large spaces, production moved out of the home and into factories. Along with the machines, workers assembled in unprecedented numbers in central locations. While putting-out merchants had traversed the countryside searching for laborers, now workers sought out manufacturers in search of employment. The mechanization of cotton spinning created a novel entity: the cotton mill. Although mills could vary tremendously in size, they shared one attribute: a nearby source of running water. To harness its energy, either a dam was constructed or an inlet was cut from a steep section of river and diverted through a waterwheel. The waterwheel drove shafts that ran through the length of the mill, upon which large leather belts could be engaged or disengaged in order to run the various machines. Unlike its predecessors, the mill’s primary function was not to simply aggregate and control labor, but to house a complex array of machinery. And by the 1780s, some mills were taking on gargantuan proportions; at two hundred feet long, thirty feet wide, and four to six stories in height, they dominated the surrounding countryside.20 Yarn production in these mills entailed three basic steps: willowing, carding, and spinning. The first step had workers, generally women, spread the raw cotton upon meshed tables and beat it with sticks to remove any twigs, leaves, and dirt that the ginning had failed to remove. Since the process pushed so much fire-hazardous cotton dust into the air, it was often completed in adjoining buildings rather than within the main mill complex. After the cotton was cleaned, a series of machines centralized in the bottom floors of the mill would transform the raw cotton into “roving,” a thin cord of lightly twisted, parallel fibers ready to be spun. First, the cotton was fed into a carding engine, a spinning cylinder covered in metal teeth fitted into a similarly toothed casing. Through carding, a snarled mess of cotton was turned into an untangled so-called sliver with the fibers running parallel. The cotton was then fed into a draw frame, a set of rollers through which the sliver was passed—stretching, twisting, and drawing it— creating the roving. The cotton strand was then wound into a roving can, from which it could be placed onto a bobbin. Finally, the cotton was ready to be spun. Spinning machines were located across the top floors of the mill, and the machines themselves usually took one of two forms: Arkwright’s water frame or, increasingly, Crompton’s mule.21 To operate all this machinery and to move the cotton through the factory, manufacturers hired hundreds of workers, most of them children and women. And while not all workers arrived at the factory gates voluntarily and received wages, the majority did. This was, as we will see later, another important institutional innovation of industrial capitalism. Outside the slave plantations of the Americas capitalists for the first time organized, supervised, and dominated the production process.22 Such domination of labor by capital, embrace of technological revolution, and social innovation did not happen elsewhere, including in the heart of the world’s cotton industry, China and I