customs, which British-grown cotton was afforded after 1819, could not reverse the tide. By the early nineteenth century, the market share of West Indian cotton was in free fall, “accelerated by the emancipation of the negroes.” In Brazil, the lack of a massive redeployment of slaves from sugar into cotton production acted as a brake on the expansion of cotton production. As cotton expert James A. Mann observed, “If Brazil could command the needful labour, there is no question but that she would become a large supplier of our wants.”29 In 1791, revolution rocked the most important cotton island of all—Saint-Domingue all but halting production of commodities for world markets, including cotton. In the largest slave revolt in history, Saint-Domingue’s enslaved population armed themselves and defeated the French colonial regime, leading to the creation of the state of Haiti and the abolition of slavery on the island. War capitalism had its first major reversal at the hands of its seemingly least powerful actors: Saint-Domingue’s hundreds of thousands of slaves. Saint-Domingue cotton production had equaled 24 percent of British cotton imports the year before the revolution, while four years later, in 1795, it was only 4.5 percent. As one British observer put it, “That Island, which has been the grand Source of Supply to us, of the Article of Cotton Wool, is, from these Causes, in a State of Anarchy, Distress, and almost Dissolution.” Indeed, he predicted that it was unlikely that “the Soil of the Planters, fertilized by the Thirst and Blood of the Negroes, will always increase the Store of our Coffers, in order to add to the Excess of your Wealth, Extravagance and Voluptuousness.” By 1795, cotton exports to France had fallen by 79 percent, and even ten years after the beginning of the revolution, exports had recovered to only one-third of their prerevolutionary level. The French National Assembly compounded British supply anxieties by disallowing the export of raw cotton from French ports. The Pennsylvania Gazette in 1792 reported matter-of-factly, “The cotton and indigo…must have been deeply injured in 1791, as they were in season during the part of that year when the disturbances were greatest.”30 The combination of rapidly rising demand for cotton and political upheaval in the Caribbean led to worrisome price spikes for manufacturers dependent on capturing new markets for cotton textiles by competing with Indian production. Throughout 1791 and 1792 John Tarleton reported to his brother that “Cotton is rising daily.” By 1795 he found “Cotton up amazingly.” In 1790, prices for West Indian cotton peaked at 21 pence per pound, in 1791 at 30 pence, and prices stayed consistently high throughout the 1790s. So traumatic was the experience of revolution for some cotton merchants that as late as 1913 the Rathbone family, one of Liverpool’s major cotton traders, remembered that the effect of the upheaval was a doubling of prices for cotton. Once war broke out between France and Britain in 1793, moreover, the import of French West Indian cottons into the British Caribbean ports came to an end.31 By the 1790s, therefore, it had become obvious to interested observers that the gap between the demand for and supply of raw cotton in Europe would grow rapidly and continuously for the foreseeable future. As the American writer Tench Coxe put it, “The peculiar fitness of the staple for the conversion into yarn, cloths, &c. by machinery… have hitherto made these demands, at home and abroad, very extensive, steady, and increasing.”32 Traditional techniques of procuring cotton had clearly been insufficient. In the West Indies and Brazil, however, building on the experiences of their sugar economies, a new way of producing cotton had been invented that focused clearly on plantations and slavery. And while the production growth in these parts of the world soon reached their limits, or, as in Haiti’s case, was curtailed by revolution, there was a nearby region that seemed to meet all conditions for producing an abundant supply of cotton: the newly born United States of America. It was there that cotton production based on slavery would reach unprecedented heights.
