a Company on more investments in infrastructure, experimental farms, and the shifting of capital out of opium production into cotton. Their cause was aided by legal changes: Starting in 1829, the Bombay government punished with up to seven years in prison people who fraudulently packaged and sold cotton. In 1851, another “Act for the Better Suppression of Frauds” came into effect, with similar goals. Numerous initiatives sought to increase and improve Indian cotton exports. And in 1853, as the British acquired Berar, a territory about 300 miles northeast of Bombay, Lord Dalhousie, governor-general of India, bragged that this “secured the finest cotton tracts which are known to exist in all the continent of India; and thus…opened up a great additional channel of supply, through which to make good a felt deficiency in the staple of one great branch of its manufacturing industry.”53 As important were schemes to collect, appropriate, and disperse knowledge. Efforts to survey the state of Indian cotton agriculture proliferated. In 1830, the administration commissioned detailed reports on cotton cultivation in India. In 1848 the government of India surveyed virtually the entire subcontinent, investigating the potential of each and every region for the increased production of cotton for export. Indeed, as elsewhere, the statistical and informational penetration of territory usually came before the incorporation into the global economy, and at midcentury, Europeans’ knowledge about the climate, soil, agricultural diseases, labor supplies, and social structures in many parts of India was still tentative. Simultaneously, exotic seeds, especially of U.S. origin, were introduced into India, new gins delivered, and experimental farms established in Gujarat, in Coimbatore, and elsewhere.54 The most significant of these efforts occurred in the 1840s, when the East India Company supported the creation of experimental farms run by U.S.-born cotton planters as a step toward supplanting U.S.-grown cotton with that from India. Several Americans had offered their services “to go to Hindustan.” One W. W. Wood, who was “born and bred on Cotton plantations,” wrote from New Orleans in June 1842 that he had been “entertaining the Idea for some time of going to India to cultivate the Cotton plant on my own account but would much prefer patronage and support” of the East India Company. He received that support and went, along with nine other planters, to Bombay with seed, gins, and implements brought from the United States. The planters traveled to various parts of India, where they were given land, a house, and a cotton press to grow exotic cotton varieties, mostly from American seed. They hired workers and contracted for the growing of cotton with peasants working on their own account. At first things looked good and the Asiatic Journal reported on the “zeal and diligence” of the American planters.55 However, despite their best efforts, the farms failed rapidly. Rainfall patterns frustrated plans to use American farming practices. Limitations of infrastructure made transport difficult. There was a growing realization that American practices were too capital-intensive for the conditions in which Indian cotton cultivators found themselves. Indians also opposed the use of so-called waste lands for experimental farms because traditionally “they have been able to feed their cattle without expense upon the wastelands.” Moreover, farms failed because peasants paid less attention to the fields on which they worked for hire than their own fields. And then there was outright resistance. One of the American farmers, “Mr. Mercer, a few weeks ago, had his bungalow burnt down, and the estate and works, together with his whole property, destroyed, except the suit of clothes he had on him.” At such moments, it certainly did not help that the Americans were “perfect strangers to the habits and Language of the country.” As a result, Mercer reported in 1845 that the “the experimental farms were only a useless expense to Government; that the American system of cultivation was not adapted to India, that the Natives of India were, from their knowledge of the climate and capabilities of the soil, able to cultivate better and much more economically than any European, and requested that the farms be abolished…”56 Indian cultivators, in effect, resisted giving up so-called waste lands, and they did not easily come to be persuaded to work for wages on farms, making a “plantation revolution” along the lines of the one occurring in the Americas unlikely. Indeed, they actively opposed the impositions of colonial officials. The American cotton farmers in India complained that they were “obliged to give way to [their workers’] prejudices.” They complained of the “laziness” of Indian cotton pickers, of cotton stolen from their farms, that workers went on strike, forcing them to give in to demands for higher wages, and that capital was lacking, soils were poor, and they “did not succeed in obtaining labor.” Eventually they decided that wage labor did not work, with one of the planters stating categorically that “cultivation by paid labor could, under no circumstances, be profitably applied to Cotton in that part of the country.”57 The experiences in India indeed seemed to confirm cotton’s dependence on coercion. Yet slavery, manufacturers began to understand, could not be completely trusted. And since manufacturers’ own capital and their own institutions were insufficient to create alternative systems, they turned to the state: They demanded new laws regarding land tenure to secure investments in cotton. They demanded even more investment in experimental farms and the accumulation of agricultural knowledge, more state investment in infrastructure, and a tax on the cultivators that would not discourage cotton growers from investing and improving the quantity and quality of their crops. Cotton capitalists in Britain and India understood that capital had to be infused in the countryside, but they found the conditions there too risky. As the Bombay Chamber of Commerce argued, “An Extension of production, so great as to reach many million of pounds annually, and an improvement in processes so radical as to involve a change in the customs and habits of a whole people, cannot be produced by measures of petty detail, but can only be looked for from the operation of causes and principles of commensurate extent and force.”58 The British East India Company defended itself vigorously against charges by cotton manufacturers and merchants that it did not sufficiently encourage cotton cultivation in India. By 1836, the East India Company had already published a book in its defense, Reports and Documents Connected with the Proceedings of the East-India Company in Regard to the Culture and Manufacture of Cotton-Wool, Raw Silk, and Indigo in India, in which it listed in great detail the myriad of activities it had undertaken. The company accused the merchants instead, demanding from them more vigilance when acquiring cotton in India and a willingness to purchase only clean, well-ginned cotton. As it happened, European cotton merchants and colonial officials would spend the next fifteen years accusing one another of being responsible for the inferior state and insufficient quantities of Indian export cotton.59 Yet despite all the bickering and all of these efforts, Indian cotton continued to play only a very minor role on world markets and posed no threat whatsoever to the supremacy of American-grown cotton. To be sure, more Indian cotton came to the United Kingdom, not least because former exports to China were redirected toward Europe. But despite that redirecting of Indian cotton, its market share in the U.K. remained low—ranging from 7.2 percent during the 1830s to 9.9 percent during the 1850s. “The success which has attended the cultivation of this article has not been so great as could be wished,” admitted the Revenue Department in 1839. More categorically, for the Bombay Chamber of Commerce, the efforts to improve and expand cotton exports “resulted in signal failure.”60 As the failed experimental farms had suggested, one important reason was the problematic transportation infrastructure. Cotton was usually brought to market on bullocks and carts, an extremely slow and expensive way to transport the raw material. As late as 1854, there were only thirty-four miles of railroad in India. One expert indeed argued that American cotton was so much more competitive than Indian cotton because of the vastly better system of railroads, and, one should add, a vastly superior system of rivers. There was a disjuncture between the industrial rhythm of Lancashire and the rhythms of economic life in India’s cotton-growing countryside. War capitalism had succeeded in bridging this gap by resorting to bodily coercion elsewhere, but not in India.61 Perhaps more important than the lack of adequate infrastructure was that the pattern of production of Indian cultivators did not articulate well with the needs of production for export. Indian peasants were still deeply embedded in a cotton economy separate from the cotton upstarts in Europe. They produced cotton for domestic consumption, and more often than not produced their own clothing. What Britain saw as a “failure” is more usefully viewed as evidence for the vast differences in the possibilities and the priorities of cotton production. The monocultural production of cotton, so prevalent in the American South, was unknown. Indian cultivators gave preference to subsistence crops, because they feared they would starve if their market crop did not succeed—one observer described “the cultivators growing Cotton & Grains in their respective fields together, and indiscriminately as their inclinations or interests dictate.” Local peasants grew cotton only “as a secondary crop,” lamented a British collector.62 Moreover, Indians were reluctant to embrace new methods of cultivation and new ways of preparing cotton for market. They resisted the use of exotic seeds. They continued to gin their cotton by footroller or churka. This resistance to different ways of growing and processing cotton, so maddening to the British colonialists, was entirely rational from the standpoint of Indian cultivators. After all, the technologies they employed were well adapted to local social and environmental conditions, and so were the indigenous seeds. Moreover, the peasants’ biggest customers were indigenous spinners, so they grew cotton that they knew would appeal to the local markets. Under conditions of extreme capital scarcity, it made sense to focus on subsistence crops, proven technology, and established markets. And since capital was not forthcoming, neither from European merchants nor from Indian traders, the revolutionizing of production was difficult if not impossible. Creating a rural proletariat, potentially another strategy to gain control over production, proved just as impossible without clear-cut private property in land, which could be fashioned only with massive expropriations and a powerful presence of the state.63 Just as peasants retained control over land, their labor, and the way they produced cotton, indigenous merchants remained powerful in the circuits of exchange, effectively limiting Western encroachment and, with it, the revolutionizing of the countryside. Trade in cotton was until the 1860s still largely dominated by Indian agents, brokers, middlemen, merchants, and even exporters. Despite “strenuous efforts…made by British interests to adapt the marketing of cotton to the needs of the export economy,” they largely failed. In 1842 the Bombay Chamber of Commerce took up a perpetual question: “Why is British capital, so powerful everywhere else, and from which so much was expected to be done for India, here so wholly inoperative?” They listed numerous disadvantages to European capitalists: They were few in number, with only forty European merchants in Bombay dealing in cotton. They had to adapt “to a preexisting state of commerce.” They lamented “the opposition and imposition that must inevitably be encountered.” And they had to compete with local spinners.64 Even when Western merchants operated in the cotton-growing districts, they met opposition at every point: “The cultivators were taught to distrust them, in consequence of their being Europeans, to demand for their Cotton a price far beyond what they accepted from Native dealers. A similar imposition was attempted in every thing—the price of labour, the hire of carts, the rent of warehouses, and the rates of churka men.” As a result, the idea of “the maintenance of Establishments in the interior” for European merchants was quite unthinkable and English merchants limited themselves “to the purchase of Cotton when brought here [Bombay] to market.” Even though they knew of the need for “Mercantile Agency in the interior of the country” as a precondition for the recasting of cotton production, they were not likely “to risk in a place so remote from their control the large amount of capital requisite to erect the buildings, and furnish the advances to the cultivators, which would be necessary to keep up permanent establishments in Guzerat.” In Berar as late as 1848, “the Cotton is usually purchased in small quantities by itinerant Dealers at the Villages where it is produced,” with much of the cotton spun by the farmers themselves, and “with no Capitalist in the Country who could make advances to any great extent worth mentioning.” Unlike in the United States, they were not yet capable of what a British parliamentary committee in 1847–48 deemed might be necessary: “for European capitalists to place themselves in direct communication with the cultivators of the soil.”65 In short, Europeans had only very superficially penetrated India’s cotton growing. Western merchants had no impact whatsoever on how cotton was produced in the Indian countryside. They had just as little impact on the ways cotton moved from its producers to the traders on the coast. British efforts to grow cotton on large farms with wage labor failed spectacularly, not least because labor could not be mobilized. One superintendent of such a cotton farm wrote that “these people all refuse to come to the Farm when the villagers require their services, and some who have been paid by Government by the month went away saying they were sick and unable to work in the Morning, and in the evening I found them working for the villagers.”66 Given such troubles, coerced labor seemed an attractive option. Indeed, the example of the great slave-based American system of cotton growing led one commercial resident to ask in 1831 if it might not be better if the company would engage in “a little gentle coercion.” Another writer similarly suggested that Europeans should employ “apprentices from the Orphan Schools,” while others favored the use of prison and 