try, destroying seven hundred spinning jennies and other machinery. Troops and militias, there and elsewhere, fought such upheavals, but with mixed success. This resistance continued in the 1820s, when French workers opposed the introduction of power looms. So effective was this wave of resistance, and so relatively limited the inexperienced state’s ability and willingness to protect its modernizing entrepreneurs, that some capitalists concluded that the path of least resistance was to limit the employment of new machines and instead focus on the production, however labor-intensive, of high-quality goods. The fear of popular uprising became a guiding star in the universe of French entrepreneurs.31 Such resistance also characterized the industrialization process in England. Already in the 1740s there had been riots against Kay’s flying shuttle, in 1753 there were attacks on “cotton reel” machines; in 1768–69 workers in Lancashire rioted against the introduction of the spinning jenny, and in 1779 Lancashire workers smashed various kinds of machinery. But machine breaking only became truly prevalent in the 1810s, a moment when the state was able and willing to use massive force to repress it. In 1811 and 1812, “steam looms [were] attacked in Stockport and elsewhere,” with another wave of machine attacks in 1826.32 Workers in other parts of the world also rebelled. In Puebla, weavers’ guilds were “extremely hostile” to machine production of cotton yarn. Factory owners adamant about introducing new machines hid innovators and their machines in a “secret place” to be safe from guild hostility. That fear was also prevalent in Veracruz. In Switzerland, weavers revolted in the 1820s, demanding that power looms be outlawed, burning down a factory in Oberuster in 1832. In the Dutch city of Tilburg in 1827, workers objecting to the introduction of steam engines smashed the windows of factory owner Pieter van Dooren.33 The expansion of the world’s mechanized cotton industry thus not only rested on the deployment of new technologies and access to capital and markets, but also on the ability of capitalists to turn thousands and eventually millions of people into proletarians—and, importantly, to break resistance to the imposition of a radically new way of living and working. As a contemporary observed in England in 1795, “The several modes of accelerating labour have been always stoutly resisted by the labouring class, when the different machinery was first introduced.”34 This was, as one historian has remarked in regard to the Black Forest’s Wiesental, a process of “inner colonializations”—the colonialization and domination by capital of ever more territories and social relations. Yet in the face of weakened feudal elites, such a transition was possible—and consolidating states played a key role enabling it. Indeed, the state became exceedingly important in the repression of working-class collective action, demonstrating once more how decisive state capacity was to industrial capitalism. States passed laws outlawing everything from trade unions, to strikes, to public assemblies, to labor-oriented political parties. States criminalized workers’ efforts to improve their working conditions. When machine breaking spread throughout the empire of cotton, as we have seen, states responded. As Luddites in Britain (and also in France) destroyed hundreds of spinning machines in 1811–12, Parliament passed a law in February 1812 that made machine breaking a capital crime. Thirty Luddites were hanged in 1812–13, and nineteen more in 1830. Others were exiled to Australia or imprisoned. And the British state cracked down on workers’ collective action in other ways as well: Pitt’s Two Acts of 1795 suspended habeas corpus and outlawed gatherings of over fifty people without prior authorization. The Combination Acts of 1799 and 1800 outlawed trade unions—leading, for example, to John Doherty’s sentencing to ten years of hard labor in 1818, his crime being membership in the (illegal) Manchester Cotton-Spinners’ Society. The British state, not quite trusting the mechanism it had devised to assure social peace, also prepared for battle with workers—between 1792 and 1815 alone, 155 military barracks were built in industrial areas. As one historian concludes, “The magnitude of government repression astonishes.” When workers rebelled, mill owners often came to depend on the state to suppress such upheaval, making mill owners’ ability to accumulate capital increasingly reliant on the power of nationalizing states—states whose own power rested more and more on successful industrialization.35 The struggle to transform workers into proletarians had made industrialists even more dependent on the state, a remarkable testimony to the limits of their power. The territorialization of capital, its growing attachment to and dependence on nation-states, however, also enabled workers to organize collectively to improve their working conditions and wages; eventually it would turn capitalists’ dependence on the state into labor’s greatest strength. Trade unions and working-class political movements, despite multipronged efforts to repress them, created new pressures on capital across the nineteenth century, pressures that would many decades later radically reshape the world’s cotton industry. Workers not only rebelled against machine production, as we have seen, but also tried to improve their living and working conditions within a system of mechanized production. These efforts were at first feeble, but they eventually gained strength and indeed won higher wages, shorter hours, and better working conditions. In the first half of the nineteenth century, successes were still few and far between, but the struggle abounded. Some working-class associations had already emerged before 1800 among British weavers. In 1792, Stockport and Manchester mule spinners formed unions. In 1807, handloom weavers collected 130,000 signatures to advocate for what they termed a “legal wage.” In 1826, riots of cotton workers spread from Manchester, as weavers assembled and threatened to damage power loom factories. A Fred Foster from Manchester reported “with much pleasure” to Secretary of State Robert Peel on April 28, 1826, that once workers assembled in the streets, “the riot act was proclaimed & the principal streets were cleared by detachments of troops.” In 1844, weavers famously rebelled in Silesia. In New England, women cotton mill workers walked off their job in Pawtucket, Rhode Island, in 1824, making it the first strike by factory workers in the United States. English mule spinners also brought collective action strategies with them to the United States, especially to New England, and in 1858 the Mule Spinners’ Union of Fall River was born. Spanish cotton workers forged a labor movement during the 1840s and 1850s, and the year 1854 saw the first general strike among spinners. In France, textile workers participated in 35 percent of all strikes recorded between 1830 and 1847. Women sometimes took the lead in such collective action: In Lowell, Massachusetts, for example, women workers organized in 1844 the Lowell Female Labor Reform Association, fighting for better working conditions and a shorter workday. Already by midcentury, cotton manufacturers responded to the militancy of their workers by moving their capital elsewhere, with Catalonian entrepreneurs perhaps the vanguard when they increasingly relocated production to isolated factory villages along the Llobregat and the Ter Rivers outside Barcelona to escape their troublesome workers. As in the case of cotton growing, workers’ collective action and the spatial arrangements of the world’s cotton industry intersected.36 Yet these incipient efforts at unionization, strikes, and other forms of collective action directed toward improving wages and the working conditions of cotton workers demonstrate that once the control and mobilization of labor were “nationalized” within powerful states, and indeed became matters of state, workers also gained new opportunities to improve their situation by appealing to the state itself and mobilizing within national political spaces. The nonpecuniary penalties for violation of employment contracts, for example, became increasingly untenable as a result of workers’ collective action. When in England large segments of the working class gained the vote in 1867, trade unions pressured the state to limit allowable remedies for workers’ breach of contract, and succeeded in 1875. In Germany it took until the revolution of 1918 to end criminal penalties for breach of contract.37 Indeed, “employment at will”—allowing workers to leave their jobs whenever they decide to do so—was the result of decades of struggle by workers, not a “natural” outgrowth of the emergence of industrial capitalism and even less so the precondition for its emergence. From the factory to the plantation, the expansion of freedom rested on the organization and collective action of workers. The labor market as idealized in modernday economics textbooks as often as not came about as a result of strikes, unions, and riots. The empire of cotton from its 1780s beginnings to 1861 in effect rested on two very different forms of labor, and two very different forms of the organization of production. On the western shores of the Atlantic were the vibrant, expanding, and enormously profitable slave plantations, the latest outgrowth of the dynamic war capitalism that Europeans had been building since the sixteenth century. In Europe itself, but also in New England and a few other areas of the world, a much more novel and more dynamic organization of production had emerged: industrial capitalism, with its spectacularly productive spinning and weaving mills based on wage labor. Connected by the mediation of a group of merchants, these two systems grew side by side, the one feeding the power of the other. Capital, personified by merchants, facilitated the rapid expansion of both slave cotton plantations and wage labor cotton factories, connecting the seemingly opposing legacies of the one to the other—until the day one of them collapsed. Once that happened, once slavery within the empire of cotton expired like some distant supernova, its crucial contribution to the construction of industrial capitalism could be written out of our collective memory.
