 lubricated the flow of capital, and thus cotton, around the globe with ever greater velocity.44 This system of extending credit was vulnerable to disruptions precisely because it was so global in scope. Every one of its parts was related to every other; if people failed in one part of the empire, the crisis could spread rapidly to every other part. Lancashire manufacturers were dependent on foreign markets, and the failure of merchants in these markets to remit payments could create serious problems at home. “As it is about Eleven months since you purchased from us the last parcel of Goods, and our engagements are heavy and will be no doubt pressing this spring, permit us to request from you an early remittance in Cash or produce,” exhorted the New York merchants Hamlin and Van Vechten with considerable anxiety. If prices for raw cotton fell rapidly, as sometimes happened, merchants would hold cotton worth less than the advances they had made, making it difficult or impossible for them to pay their debts. The result: the global panics of 1825, 1837, and 1857.45 Despite periodic collapses, capital for the most part moved with remarkable ease into the farthest reaches of cotton production in regions of the world dominated by slave labor. It was much harder for European buying brokers, selling brokers, importing merchants, and factors, despite the rapidly growing capital at their command, to penetrate cotton-growing countrysides dominated by peasant labor. The rhythms of peasant production, as we have seen, proved stubborn—much to the voluble frustration of cotton merchants and manufacturers. In fact, the tools of European war capitalism, so effective in North America, did not allow for the full incorporation of land and labor in Asia and Africa into the global cotton nexus. The necessary infrastructure, physical, administrative, military and legal, simply did not exist. Not that there was no connection between European merchant capital and peasant producers, for example in India. However, the quantities of cotton traded remained limited, and the quality never quite satisfied European manufacturers. The ways cotton was produced in India never meshed well with the particular needs of modern European spinning factories. Indeed, in regions where cotton was grown by peasant labor, European capital did not reach the producers. Instead, local growers retained sufficient control over their land and labor to escape the monocultural production of cotton for global markets, and indigenous merchants retained control over the internal cotton trade—and even exports. As late as 1851, Indian merchants such as Cursetjee Furndoonjee, Cowasji Nanabhoy Davar, and Merwanji Framju Panday exported more cotton bales from India than did European merchants. If anything, European firms were more often subordinate agents for Indian cotton merchants, and borrowers of Indian merchant capital. Indian merchants, of course, also dominated cotton production within India itself, with local capital largely financing cotton growing for export.46 The central role of Indian merchants in the trade in raw cotton built upon their earlier role in the cloth trade. In 1788, the Board of Trade in India had reported to the governor-general of the East India Company that the cotton trade “is still very much in the simple inartificial state of the Natives, the business of it greatly depending on them.” At first, Indian merchants such as Bombay traders Pestonjee Jemsatjee, Jamsetjee Jejeebhoy, and Sorabje Jevangee were able to translate this expertise in the cloth trade to the trade in raw cotton as well. As a result, throughout the first half of the nineteenth century, the influence of Western merchants in India usually remained limited to coastal cities, and even there they encountered stiff competition from Indian merchants. The Bombay Chamber of Commerce, founded in 1836, counted among its numbers numerous Indian merchants, reflecting their continued importance. As the chamber observed as late as 1847, “Your Committee did not think it proper to hold out any hope that Merchants, as such, could in the present state of European agency and operation in the country, take up any such position, involving as it would do the maintenance of Establishments in the interior: and it was thought proper to add the only support which English Merchants could contemplate affording, must be limited to the purchase of Cotton when brought here to market, and which, it was said, they were quite prepared to do.”47 In the cotton-growing countryside itself, Indian traders advanced funds to growers, often at exorbitant rates of interest, who in turn sold the raw cotton to brokers, who then advanced the cotton to coastal merchants—a system the British considered “evil,” principally because it eluded their control. As Bombay-based merchant John Richards reported in 1832 to the Barings in London, “The Native Merchants exclusively receive the produce from the interior, from along the Coast, the Persian Gulf, the Red Sea, China there are many of them both Hindoos & Parsees that are wealthy, some even possessing large capital. As yet the Business is so completely in their hands that Contracts for Cotton which have been attempted to be entered into with Merchants up the Coast have failed in the attempt.” This dominance of non-European capital, along with the continued control over land and labor by local peasants, resulted, among other things, in cotton production geared to the needs of local producers, including local manufacturers, rather than the specifications of distant European mill owners.48 The independence of Indian merchants and producers was hardly exceptional in the first half of the nineteenth century; European commercial penetration into the hinterland of cotton-growing areas was still the exception rather than the rule in most of the world. At mid-century, most cotton produced was never traded through the books of European or North American merchants. In China, imported Indian cotton came under the control of Hong merchants who sold it to dealers in the hinterland. In western Anatolia, like India, the trade between its port city, Izmir, and its cottonproducing regions was in the hands of local merchants. In another part of the Ottoman Empire, Egypt, the impact of Western merchants on trade between producers and the port of Alexandria remained just as limited. Until the late 1840s, Muhammad Ali enforced a virtual monopoly of acquiring raw cotton from producers and selling it to coastal merchants, not least by forcing peasants to pay their taxes in cotton. And some newly industrializing areas avoided dependence on imported cotton. In Mexico, for example, the Puebla industrialists either purchased cotton directly from producers or drew on the offers from Veracruz merchants.49 Remarkably, throughout the first half of the nineteenth century the penetration of European capital into the global cotton-growing countryside was largely limited to areas in which cotton was grown by slave labor—slavery, not peasant production, was the handmaiden of wage labor at the birth of the Industrial Revolution. Only after slavery became untenable as a mode of labor mobilization and European states had gained vastly increased administrative, judicial, military, and infrastructural capacities thanks to their ability to capture some of the wealth generated by mechanized manufacturing would European capital and state power begin to revolutionize the global countryside in India, Egypt, and, eventually, Central Asia and Africa. Despite its failure to integrate peasant producers into the empire of cotton, the signal characteristic of the world’s first modern manufacturing industry was its global nature. This globalization required globalizers, people who saw the opportunities of the new order and inspired their business communities and their states to collective action to secure it. The principal globalizers were neither the planters nor manufacturers, many intensely local in their mind-set, but instead, as we have seen, the traders who specialized in creating networks that connected cultivators, manufacturers, and consumers. Forging such global networks took courage and imagination. When Johannes Niederer tendered his services to the Swiss merchant house of Volkart in 1854, he offered to scout market opportunities in Batavia, Australia, Macassar, and Mindanao, Japan, China, Rangoon, Ceylon, and Cape Town. Such globetrotting traders, as one historian has concluded, “ruled the industry.” Indeed, manufacturers and growers regularly complained about the power of traders, while many merchants, for their part, looked down upon manufacturers as provincials and gamblers: Robert Creighton, a Pennsylvania cotton trader, warned his sons even in his will against becoming involved in manufacturing, as did Alexander Brown, reminding his son William in 1819 that all members of the firm are “unanimously opposed to any interest being taken in the Cotton Mill.”50 To become such powerful actors in the empire of cotton and to manage this trade profitably, the Rathbones, Barings, Lecesnes, Wätjens, Rallis, and others constructed dense networks through which information, credit, and goods could flow reliably.51 Building such networks was extraordinarily difficult. The Rathbones, for example, spent astonishing energy nurturing their links to merchants in New York, Boston, and various southern ports, especially Charleston and New Orleans. They corresponded constantly with business partners, trying to get market updates and gain access to trade opportunities. They also traveled frequently to the United States, and extended stays in North America became a rite of passage for young members of the firm.52 Other merchants labored just as hard to create these networks. In 1828, Thomas Baring traveled up the coast of the United States from New Orleans to Boston, researching local business conditions, establishing closer connections to merchants in southern towns to recruit more trade, and granting credit to various southern firms that allowed them to make advances on cotton shipments. Jules Lecesne followed the same path, building branch houses in various cotton ports throughout the Atlantic world, and staffing them with his relatives, who constantly exchanged information on prices and harvests, and who eventually even published a French bulletin on cotton shipments in New Orleans. What was needed above all was reliable information on everything from weather conditions to the temperaments of brokers.53 The global cotton trade, as we have seen, rested on credit. Credit rested on trust. Trust, in a global market extended well beyond the kin of any family or tribe, rested on information. Information was accordingly at the core of most merchants’ activities. A vast swath of information was potentially relevant to any merchant, but two strands were the most valuable: who paid back their debts, and what would happen to the price of cotton in the coming months. As a result, millions of letters—now housed in dark corners of libraries and archives—exchanged between merchants spoke to these subjects. Expectations about future price movements obviously mattered a great deal, and thus information about factors that could possibly influence prices—the weather in cotton-growing areas, the effects of wars, the state of regional economies—was precious. While institutions such as the Bank of England began gathering such information as well, most of it was still in private hands, collected (and hoarded) for private use only.54 Where reliable information was scarce, rumors and gossip filled the void. Reputation made and unmade firms, and the spread of manipulated information could move markets. Being able to provide information, not surprisingly, was a major source of prestige, and a primary way that both an individual merchant and his firm improved their reputation. When the Hamburg merchants of Menge & Niemann offered their services to Phelps, Dodge, a commercial house in New York in 1841, they introduced themselves and their business, then immediately provided information on the development of the Hamburg trade, including a price circular printed under their name, which listed the local prices for a whole range of commodities, including cotton.55 Doing business with them, they suggested, would give Phelps, Dodge privileged access to useful information. The need both to have information and to be seen to have it was why at the outset of his career as a Liverpool cotton broker, Samuel Smith immediately launched his own cotton circular, a step that in retrospect he judged “aided not a little in establishing my business.” On a grander scale, in his memoir of his life in the cotton industry, Vincent Nolte, the Barings agent in New Orleans, claimed he was the first person to print up a cotton market circular, starting in 1818: “The meteorological weather tables had given me the idea of getting up one similar to them, which should exhibit the course and fluctuations of prices, from week to week, during the shipping period of three successive years, and designate the difference of exchange, each time, by black, red, and blue lines.” Such information sharing, he went on to note, had resulted in much new business.56 Because production was so dispersed and so global, information was difficult to assemble. In 1845, Frédéric C. Dollfus, a member of one of the oldest cotton manufacturing families in Mulhouse, arrived in the port of Singapore. His goal was to understand what kinds of cotton goods were in demand there, and to inform cotton manufacturers back home what prices they might fetch. After detailed studies of the local markets in Singapore, Dollfus proceeded to Macao, Canton, Hong Kong, Manila, Batavia, and Semarang. Covering some of the most important Asian cotton marts, he shared his hard-won intelligence with an interested audience back home. A year later, Dollfus returned home to Mulhouse.57 This trip was just one of many efforts of Mulhouse manufacturers to gain market information. In one of the era’s greatest information-gathering ventures, they collected throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries thousands of cloth samples from around the world and took careful notes as to their provenance and local market prices, all in an effort to equip local manufacturers to produce for remote markets. Catalan manufacturers engaged in a very similar though more modest project.58 Access to information in turn privileged certain locations within the empire of cotton, as William Rathbone VI realized in 1849, when he predicted that New York would become “more and more the centre of the American trade (guided of course by advices from European markets)…. Within 10 days sail from England & within an hour of information [by the newly invented telegraph] & communication with New Orleans, St. Louis, Cincinnati, Charleston & a party is in possession of more informa