bout 31 percent of U.S. merchandise exports by value. By 1860, the value of tobacco exports had doubled, and wheat exports had increased by a factor of eight—but cotton had mushroomed nearly nine times to \$192 million. It now constituted nearly 60 percent of the value of all merchandise exports. As merchants built the world’s first truly global economy, cotton took center stage.9 Merchants, some of them dealers or brokers, and other agents, import merchants, or factors, accurately judged that there were ample opportunities for profits in this vast new trade. Distinct groups of merchants reaped profits from each of the transactions necessary to bring cotton from the plantation to the consumer.10 Commissions, interest, and payment for services filled their coffers. Some grew fabulously rich, the Rathbones in Liverpool, the Barings in London, the Rallis in London, Bombay, and elsewhere, the Volkarts in Winterthur, the Siegfrieds in Le Havre, the Wätjens in Bremen, the Forstalls in New Orleans, the Browns in New York, the Cassavettits in Alexandria, and the Jejeebhoys in Bombay prominent among them. Cotton underpinned the vast wealth and power of these families, allowing them to build mansions staffed by large numbers of servants, collect precious artworks, invest in other businesses, and travel the world. But thousands upon thousands of less wealthy cotton merchants, whose names have largely been forgotten, peopled the trade as well. Collectively, they forged new spaces of capital. For the marriage between slavery and industry to succeed, however, merchants had first to profitably transmit the patterns of machine production and industrial capitalism into the global countryside. The world had no shortage of big dreamers before the nineteenth century, but heretofore no one had been able to realize the potential of the productive hinterlands and vulnerable consumer markets over such great expanses. The process through which these merchants did so was exceedingly complicated—indeed, it rested on a network of actors whose field of vision was often, though not always, quite provincial, and who at times did nothing more than move the logic of industrial capitalism one step closer to rural cotton producers. By merely connecting various places and stages in the process of cotton manufacturing to one another, however, the merchants, often unwittingly, created something quite new. For the first time in history, they drew upon the full diversity of labor regimes, a hallmark of the emerging capitalism—slaves growing cotton, wage workers manufacturing yarn, and slaves as well as wage workers ginning, pressing, loading, and moving cotton bales. In doing so, they helped Europe overcome its resource constraints. Watching these merchants in action, in all their mundane and seemingly inconsequential activities, helps us solve the puzzle of how industrial and war capitalism came to be connected. Considering their importance in forging the world of modern capitalism, the actual work of merchants seems often almost banal. Most of their time was spent writing letters, talking to suppliers and customers, traveling, and making calculations. Because the empire of cotton they created was so vast, merchants soon specialized in specific aspects of the trade. Some focused on moving cotton from plantations to ports, others on transoceanic trade; some concentrated on selling raw cotton to manufacturers, while others speculated in exporting cotton goods, and others distributed imported cotton goods throughout a particular country or region. Usually merchants focused their trade on a particular region, becoming experts on connecting certain parts of the world to one another. Consequently, they had businesses that could look surprisingly different from each other. The global system, in effect, was built not from a central, imperial directive, but rather by myriad actors with local and diverse connections often solving very local problems. The most urgent problem merchants helped solve was how to supply manufacturers with raw cotton. As the scale and efficiency of the industry increased, and as cotton did not grow anywhere near the factories, manufacturers needed help securing ever greater supplies from the remote reaches of the world. During the 1760s, 1770s, and 1780s, most purchased this cotton from dealers located in the spinning districts themselves, dealers who traded on their own accounts and provided credit to the manufacturers to enable them to purchase it.11 In 1788, the city of Manchester, for example, counted twenty-two such dealers. The dealers, in turn, bought the cotton from Liverpool merchants who, in the eighteenth and even early nineteenth centuries, were still mostly general merchants for whom cotton was only one of a number of commodities they had on offer. Yet as the quantity of cotton traded increased dramatically in the first few decades of the nineteenth century, and as manufacturers’ demands on the quality and price of the cotton they received changed, cotton manufacturers left this almost quaint world behind. Instead of purchasing cotton from dealers, they began to use brokers. Brokers, in contrast to the dealers, did not take possession of cotton; they instead charged a commission for brokering trades between importing merchants and manufacturers. As a result, mill owners could purchase not just the cotton that their dealers happened to own, but any of the cotton available in the port of Liverpool—getting the quantities and qualities they desired at the cheapest possible price. Brokers provided a more direct connection between manufacturers and cotton-importing merchants, and also organized the market by setting rules and regulations, distributing information, and providing elaborate arbitration services. They “brought to Liverpool the technical knowledge of the industry,” argues one scholar, and “they also brought a new kind of administrative skill and efficiency to deal with the problems of what was, virtually, a new trade.” As a result, brokers “became central figure[s] in the market.” Expert both in the new technical requirements of spinning and in the bewildering Liverpool market, they helped manufacturers to navigate the varieties of cotton available in Liverpool and acquire the cotton qualities they needed for specific manufacturing processes.12 By 1790 four such specialized cotton brokers had emerged in Liverpool. Many others followed, and by 1860, 322 brokers walked the streets of that city. They generally operated as small family firms and came from a variety of backgrounds: some were former dealers, others had been spinners, and still others had worked as import merchants. Eventually, brokers specialized even further. Some became buying brokers, purchasing cotton for manufacturers, and others selling brokers, selling cotton for importing merchants.13 Thanks to these changes, manufacturers removed themselves from the inspection of cottons in the market. While early in the century manufacturers had personally touched the cottons on sale, they now communicated their needs to brokers who then searched out the cotton they wanted. Ever more specialized in the production of particular qualities of yarns and goods, and demanding ever greater varieties of cotton, manufacturers found going into market to purchase all that cotton impossible. They depended on a constant flow of the crucial raw material into their factories, and brokers guaranteed that supply. As brokers replaced dealers, they also changed the way cotton was sold. Again, the needs of machine production dictated these changes. Throughout the eighteenth and well into the first half of the nineteenth century, cotton had been traded as a physical commodity. Merchants bought and sold specific sacks of cotton, dealing with a bewildering variety of different cottons from different parts of the world that had varying staple lengths, colors, elasticity, and cleanliness. As merchants sold specific lots in specific sacks, they in effect allowed a purchaser to trace back each particular parcel of cotton to a particular producer. The 1814 records of cotton broker George Holt show him selling “13 Bags (of cotton) waste Guinam,” “6 Bags Barbadoes,” “10 Bags Paras, 15 bags Bahis, 25 bags Dyneraras, 10 bags South Island,” and unspecified amounts of further varieties such as “Bengal,” “Surat,” “Bourbons,” “Demarara,” and “Pernam.” As Liverpool cotton broker Thomas Ellison observed in 1886, “Down to the opening of the present century the usual practice was for the seller to give to the buyer the marks, ship’s name, and place of storage of any lot or lots of cotton which he might have for sale, in order that the buyer might go to the warehouse and examine the bales for himself.” The enormous natural variety of cotton was thus preserved in the trade, and all participants in that trade dealt in cotton that they had seen and touched.14 When the trade in cotton exploded in the first decades of the nineteenth century, this system came under strain. Brokers hurried around the port of Liverpool inspecting hundreds of bags and bales, trying to match specific lots of cotton to the needs of specific manufacturers—manufacturers who needed particular qualities to produce particular kinds of yarn. Soon this became all but impossible. Pushed by manufacturers needs, brokers sought new institutional solutions. First, they moved from physically inspecting each sack of cotton to buying by sample.15 A small batch of fiber was drawn from each bale and on the basis of that sample a price was determined and a sale effected. These samples, unlike the bales themselves, could easily be carried around and even mailed. In a second step, brokers developed clear standards and a precise vocabulary for cotton; eventually, manufacturers would acquire cotton without even inspecting samples. They would, in effect, not order a particular bale of cotton from a particular place, but a particular quality. This was a radical recasting of the trade. Cotton shows enormous variability in grade, staple, and character. As of 1790, no attempt at grading cottons had been made, even though grades already existed for other commodities, such as sugar and coffee, for which categories such as “middling” and “good ordinary” were widely used. In 1796, in Charleston, “Georgia cotton” and upland cotton were mentioned for the first time as discrete categories, and in 1799 in Philadelphia, note was made of “Georgia Tennessee cotton”—categories that still reflected place of origin. That year, the Dictionnaire universel de la géographie commerçante still listed diverse cottons only by where they were grown. In 1804, however, Charleston merchants listed “common cotton,” a category that by 1805 had become “common upland.” By 1805, Sea Island cotton was graded into prime, good, fair, middling, and inferior grades. The Tradesman spoke in 1809 of “good middling cotton”; in 1815 in the New Orleans market the designation “prime” was used, two years later “first quality” cotton was listed, and another year later “middling cotton” appeared in Charleston, followed in 1822 by “choice prime cotton” in New Orleans and “choice fair” in 1823. The London Magazine mentioned these categories by 1820, a decade during which they came into widespread use. These categories were still approximations that could neither be precisely defined nor enforced, but they formed the foundation upon which later enforceable standards would be built. Without such standards, such a high-volume long-distance trade of bulk commodities would have been all but impossible—the vast diversity of nature had to be distilled and classified to make it correspond to the imperatives of machine production.16 For standards to work over the long term, purchasers had to be able to verify the quality of the cotton they had purchased. At first these rules and regulations were informal, conventions not written down but personally understood. As trading by sample increased in volume and expanse, traders in far-flung ports and manufacturers demanded rules with “some sense of permanence”—standards protected by institutions. In response, brokers created the Liverpool Cotton Brokers’ Association in 1841. One of the first things the Association did was to pass a resolution that all cotton sold by sample was warranted to contain such quality. By 1844, they had defined standards for “fair” and “middling” cotton. In 1846, the American Chamber of Commerce in Liverpool, founded in 1801 by Liverpool merchants trading with the United States, suggested that the brokers “cause samples of the several classes of American Cotton to be taken, to be placed at the disposal of the American Chamber so as to form a standard for reference in all questions as to quality of cotton.” Increasingly, the cotton market was no spontaneous interaction of utility-maximizing individuals, but a set of institutions forged outside the market itself.17 Once standards were formalized, efforts emerged to apply them internationally. In 1848 the New Orleans Chamber of Commerce wrote to the American Chamber of Commerce in Liverpool about the “great inconveniences which have hitherto frequently attended the operations of the purchasers of Cotton in New Orleans for want of a fixed standard of quality uniform with that of Liverpool and recognized as such by the Trade in both ports.” It proposed to create mutual standards for “fair middling & ordinary cotton, both New Orleans and Alabama.” These duplicate standards would then be kept in New Orleans and Liverpool, to adjudicate disputes. The American Chamber of Commerce in Liverpool obliged and voted to create such standards. A modern cotton market was now emerging as the result of collectively articulated conventions, with a private association of Liverpool merchants at its core. Capital was changing the way the cotton plant itself was seen—it would soon change the plant itself. In such subtle ways, the unrelenting pressure of capital-intensive factory production moved closer to the growing of cotton itself, forcing the logic of capital upon the logic of nature.18 Cotton standards emerged hand in hand with, and indeed enabled, another invention: a trade in cotton that had not yet arrived. For a futures market to work, information and samples had to travel faster than bulk cotton itself, something that seems to have emerged in the 1810s in Liverpool. By 1812, cotton brokers had begun to trade in cotton while it was still on the high seas, exchanging so-called “bills of lading”—documents certifying ownership of certain bales of cotton. Two years later, on August 13, 1814, George Holt sold to George Johnston & Co. one hundred bags of cotton “to arrive” from Amelia Island in ten days. Such trade in the future delivery of cottons increased throughout the first half of the nineteenth century. In 1858, the American Chamber of Commerce in Liverpool explicitly regulated such “to arrive” contracts. 