otton agriculture, however, occurred farther to the west. In Arkansas, Louisiana, Oklahoma, and Texas, the production of cotton exploded from 1,576,594 bales in 1860 to 7,283,000 bales in 1920—a factor of 4.6 in the half century after the U.S. Civil War. By far the most important expansion took place in Texas, a state whose farmers had only produced 431,463 bales of cotton in 1860, but produced ten times as many, 4,345,000 bales, in 1920. Indeed, the cotton growth of 1920 in Texas alone equaled about 80 percent of that of the entire South in 1860. And by the late 1910s and early 1920s, vast investments in irrigation infrastructure by the federal government enabled a further extension of cotton agriculture into the arid lands of Arizona and California.26 Territorial expansion—“the great land rush”—was thus crucial to the position of the United States within the empire of cotton, paralleling developments in other parts of the world. Most of these new cotton-growing territories had been captured from Mexico in 1848, and without their acquisition, Mexico, not the United States, might have been the world’s premier cotton producer by the early twentieth century. The incorporation of these territories relied as much on infrastructure advances as it did on land grabs. As with India and Africa, cotton bloomed alongside the railroad. There were no railroads in Oklahoma before the mid-1880s, but by 1919, 6,534 miles of railroad crisscrossed the state. In Texas, there were 711 miles of railroad in 1870, but 16,113 miles in 1919, including into the fertile lands of the blackland prairie, which the Houston and Texas Central had connected to Dallas in 1872. Once it had done so, cotton production exploded: Dallas County cultivators grew 3,834 bales of cotton in 1870 but 21,649 bales in 1880—an increase of 465 percent in only one decade.27 The arrival of cotton growers in most cases displaced the indigenous inhabitants. In the antebellum decades, native peoples who had inhabited the cotton-growing territories of Georgia, Alabama, and Mississippi had been pushed farther west. Now pressure resumed. In October 1865, the Kiowa and Comanche were forced to give up land in central Texas, west Kansas, and eastern New Mexico—land that was turned, among other things, into cotton plantations. Shortly thereafter, many of the Texas plains Indians were pushed into reservations in Oklahoma, and so were the last southwestern Indians during the Red River War of 1874 and 1875, thereby freeing up further land for cotton growing.28 Yet Oklahoma ultimately provided little protection for these Native Americans. By the 1880s, the old Oklahoma and Indian territories came under pressure from white settlers who hoped to displace the native population from the most fertile lands. In 1889 the U.S. government gave in and paid the Creeks and Seminoles to surrender claims to land in the center of Oklahoma. Over the next few years, further “land runs” in various parts of Oklahoma put ever more pressure on native people. Many white settlers began to grow cotton, as Oklahoma’s fertile soil and its infrastructural opening to the world market, thanks to railroad construction, made such expansion a profitable proposition. By 1907, when Oklahoma became a state, cotton was grown on more than 2 million acres and production had reached 862,000 bales, compared to 425 bales grown on 1,109 acres in 1890. Cleveland County, to cite just one example, produced thirty-nine bales of cotton in 1890, but 11,554 bales in 1909, on land that was once the home of the Quapaw. Creek and Seminole Indians later lived there, tribes that had been forced to leave the southeastern parts of the United States during the late 1820s and 1830s where their lands once before had been turned into cotton plantations. Cotton planters chased America’s native peoples from their land, though eventually they hired some of them to work on cotton plantations. In Oklahoma, as elsewhere, the dispossession of America’s native people and the expansion of cotton-growing territories went hand in hand—state coercion, indeed, was central to the further expansion of the empire of cotton.29 The territorial expansion of the empire of cotton in the United States, Central Asia, Egypt, and Korea, among other places, was vast. Yet statesmen and capitalists pushed the cotton frontier ever further, and Africa, in particular, became the focus of European efforts. These European efforts in fact were directly related to the United States’ and Russia’s successful expansion of their respective cotton empires, and focused on the goal of emancipating themselves from the United States’ cotton supply. Africa, in other words, was to be the “South” and “West” of Europe—a supplier of raw materials, labor, and agricultural commodities that were deemed necessary to confront the global challenge of a rising United States with its seemingly limitless supplies of industrial raw materials, and also of a Russia whose very territorial extent embodied a rising “threat.”30 Imperial efforts at cotton growing in Africa were the cutting edge of the cotton empire’s new “national” constitution. Take Germany, for example. In the last decade of the nineteenth century this latecomer to colonialism engaged in frantic efforts to secure cotton from its African possessions. This was not surprising considering that by 1900 the German cotton industry was the most significant on the European continent and, indeed, the third largest in the world. Despite significant productivity increases, the number of workers directly engaged in cotton spinning and weaving had increased to nearly four hundred thousand, with an estimated one in eight German industrial workers so employed by 1913, making the “healthy development of our cotton industry a vital question for our national economy.” The value of their output was the most considerable of all domestic industries and constituted the nation’s most important export product. In 1897, the German cotton industry produced goods valued at 1 billion marks, or about 36 percent more than those of the next largest industry, coal, and 45 percent more than the industry that symbolized Germany’s economic miracle and all too often overshadows our historical imagination, the male-dominated iron and steel industry. And no other German industry was so reliant on other countries for its crucial raw material. Because all raw cotton came from abroad, it amounted to Germany’s costliest import. A full 1 billion pounds of cotton were imported into Germany in 1902. “King Cotton has become the most powerful ruler,” observed cotton manufacturer Karl E. Supf, “he has deeply affected the social conditions, yes, even entirely rearranged them.”31 Considering the size of the industry, German cotton industrialists understandably expressed a desire to secure an ample, regular, and inexpensive supply of raw cotton. From the beginnings of a German mechanized cotton industry that supply had largely come from the United States. However, the cotton shortages of the 1860s had indelibly etched in the minds of cotton industrialists and statesmen the danger of depending on the United States for raw cotton. Indian and Egyptian cotton did gain market share during the crisis, but by the 1880s and 1890s the United States again supplied— depending on the years—between 50 and 90 percent of cotton to the German industry.32 Such overwhelming market dominance worried cotton interests. By late century, these concerns sharpened as German cotton importers realized that new, competing low-cost manufacturers were emerging in places such as Japan, the southern United States, and Mexico. German manufacturers and statesmen could do little to alter this situation before their creation of a colonial empire in the 1880s. Once Germany acquired colonies in Africa and the South Seas, however, new ways of solving the “cotton question” emerged. Interest in African cotton reached fever pitch at the turn of the century, when cotton industrialists spoke of a global “Baumwollkulturkampf”—a “cotton-growing struggle.” Following these concerns, in 1896 these manufacturers created the Colonial Economic Committee (Kolonial-Wirtschaftliches Komitee), an organization devoted to utilizing colonies as a source of raw materials for home industries. More than four hundred German cotton industrialists contributed funds to its operation.33 Four factors spurred cotton industrialists’ interest in raw cotton production in German colonies. They were deeply concerned about the rise in cotton prices at century’s end, which more than doubled between 1898 and 1904. German industrialists argued that the ever greater use of cotton by the two major growing countries, the United States and India, was the root cause of such increases, which they saw as permanent. Most dramatically, the United States had used only about 20 percent of its home-grown cotton in its own factories before the Civil War, yet by the 1870s that proportion had grown to around 33 percent and to nearly 50 percent after 1900. Moreover, like many American industrialists and landowners, German manufacturers feared that the United States lacked sufficient cheap labor to plant, prune, and harvest all the additional cotton now required on global markets. Labor shortages, they argued, would eventually limit the expansion of American cotton agriculture. The cotton market remained volatile, and these price fluctuations made it difficult to plan profitable production. Colonial cotton, in contrast, promised to ensure stable and low prices, and as an added benefit could prevent a repeat of the market disruption they had experienced during the cotton famine of the 1860s.34 With that scarcity in mind, manufacturers feared that demand for U.S. cotton by newly emerging manufacturing nations, especially Japan, would further diminish their supplies. And in a strategic move meant to secure broad political support for their agenda, cotton manufacturers argued that a prosperous cotton industry was essential to combatting working-class upheaval. Karl Supf invoked the terrible social effects of the American Civil War, and concluded that “it [was] obvious that a crisis…in the cotton industry would include a social danger whose results are unpredictable.” Even the generally anticolonial Social Democrats expressed their hope that colonial cotton would break the “cotton monopoly” of the United States. The fantastic plan of these cotton industrialists was to grow cotton for German manufacturers on German-controlled soil under German supervision—in fact, to become more like their American and Russian competitors.35 With these arguments, cotton industrialists moved boldly into Germany’s public arena. Their interests intersected with those of powerful statesmen and bureaucrats who argued that securing colonial cotton was of great geostrategic importance. As the scholar, engineer, and Africa expert Ernst K. Henrici observed in 1899, “In the great economic competition among peoples, mass production and mass consumption are becoming central. Our colonies, if they should be of real benefit to the mother country, need to aspire towards delivering great quantities of raw materials, so that they can in turn purchase great quantities of the industrial products of the motherland.” Only colonial cotton production, argued economist Karl Helfferich, could break the “economic rule of America over the European cotton industry.” Colonial cotton, in short, was the only way to resist “American rape.”36 Colonial cotton symbolized the new symbiosis of a powerful nation-state with powerful national industries. This symbiosis in fact characterized a new form of global capitalism centered on the strengthening of national capital in rival capitalist nations.37 Cotton growing was important to European expansion in Africa from its very beginning, just as Africa had provided much of the labor that had enabled cotton industrialization since the 1780s. For example, in 1888—only four years after its African explorations had begun—Germany embarked upon its first systematic trials of growing cotton for world markets on the African continent. In May 1890, a Samoan cotton planter, Ferdinand Goldberg, arrived in the German colony of Togo to investigate the possibilities of cotton growing there. While his experiment failed, in 1900, as we will see, the German imperial government made another effort, recruiting cotton farmers from Alabama to go to Togo and expand its cotton agriculture. At the same time, colonial bureaucrats and cotton manufacturers built huge cotton plantations in German East Africa. In 1907, German textile industrialists Heinrich and Fritz Otto opened a cotton farm in Kilossa; three years later, about a thousand workers cultivated cotton on a full 37,065 acres. Soon the Ottos were joined by the Leipziger Baumwollspinnerei and by manufacturer Hermann Schubert from Zittau in Saxony.38 French cotton manufacturers and colonial bureaucrats made similar efforts. In the French Soudan, in Côte d’Ivoire, and in French Equatorial Africa, colonial penetration went hand in hand with an effort to secure cotton—the French minister of colonies studied the prospects for colonial cotton in great detail. African cotton exports to France at first only supplied a very small percentage of the cotton used by the French industry, but they increased rapidly. Côte d’Ivoire, for example, supplied next to no cotton in 1912, but more than 4.4 million pounds in 1925. In other colonies, similar developments occurred. Portuguese colonialists in Mozambique began their first cottongrowing experiments in 1901, an effort that produced 6 million pounds by 1928. The Belgians had begun their first tentative cotton-growing efforts in the Congo territory in 1890, yet production only exploded in the 1920s, and at a cost of tremendous violence. In 1920, rural cultivators produced 3.4 million pounds of cotton in the Belgian Congo, 98.8 million pounds in 1931, and 312 million pounds in 1941. This was a respectable amount, equaling about 15 percent of the production of the United States before the Civil War, when King Cotton reigned supreme.39 The British, however, undertook the most significant effort to grow cotton in Africa. By 1913, 74 percent of all cotton exported from Africa to Europe came out of British colonies. In the eyes of the British Cotton Growing Association, no other part of the world had “larger latent possibilities than our West African possessions,” with plenty of land and labor available. As Africa’s people could no longer be sold to the Americas, Europeans concluded that they might profitably be encouraged or compelled to grow agricultural commodities for world markets at home. Altogether, Africa exported more than 2.315 billion pounds of cotton in 1930, a little more than the United States in the year before the Civil War.40 Taken together, between 1860 and 1920, 55 million acres of land in Africa, Asia, and the