## Introduction In the last two centuries, human power to control and shape the surroundings we inhabit has been continuously augmented, to the extent that it has become a truism to speak of a man-made world. The instrument of this transformation has been mechanized industry, and from its workshops and factories a swelling flood of artefacts and mechanisms has poured out to satisfy the needs and desires of an ever-greater proportion of the world's population. The change has not only been quantitative, but has also radically altered the qualitative nature of the life we live, or aspire to live. In the history of industrial design the twin themes of continuity and change constantly recur in different guises, and at times pronounced tensions have been created by their conflicting demands. These tensions have been reinforced by the nature of the historical evolution of industrial design. Although its roots lie in the craft tradition, the pattern of its emergence has not been simply a linear evolution from handwork to mechanical production, but, rather, a constant diversification, encompassing a broadening range of new factors and influences. A clear thread of development is discernible, however, in that design, the conception of visual form, has become progressively separated from the act of making. In craft production, conception and realization are linked and coordinated by the interplay of hand, eye and materials. The fact that the entire process can be accomplished by one person disguises its complexity, giving it a human scale and apparent simplicity that allows it to be experienced by both practitioner and observer as a comprehensible unity. In massproduction industry this coherence is fragmented, and the complexity of conception and making is exposed by its subdivision into a series of specialized activities. These processes are interlinked, but in relationships that are often perceived as remote and impersonal. Despite the changed conditions of industrial production, many studies of design assume a persistence of the unity found in the craft tradition, by depicting design as an autonomous, inward-looking relationship between designer and product. The emphasis is placed on individual achievement, and the analysis of products is focused on identifying unique qualities of external form. This approach is sometimes reinforced by the practice of exhibitions and museum collections, which display objects as pure forms, without reference to the circumstances of production and use that influenced their design. This formalist methodology has been applied, not only for the analysis of the designs produced in the past, but frequently, and more questionably, to provide historical support for contemporary views on what constitutes good' design, usually defined in terms of specific formal principles. The emphasis, in such an approach, is generally on educating the public to accept the values and canons of taste enshrined in particular theories or institutions. By emphasizing the legitimacy of only such products as conform to these standards, it is possible to advocate the primacy or inevitability of certain traditions, thus presenting an image of formal or theoretical unity that bears little relationship to the actual diversity of design, either in the past or in the present. In reaction against the limitations of a formalist view of ordinary objects, the profound changes wrought by industrialization have been examined by considering design as a social phenomenon. Although a valuable corrective, this approach is vulnerable to a tendency to over-emphasize the context by ignoring the individual characteristics and will of designers, and relegating their role to that of deterministic instruments of social, economic or political systems and values. This study has drawn on both approaches, in discussing the contribution of individual designers as well as the social pressures that have moulded their work. It rejects the view that design can be assessed from a single standpoint, or in terms of a single set of values. It is based on the belief that the diversity of design requires a consideration of its varying roles and functions; and that its evaluation must be conditioned by the purposes for which it is intended, and which it actually serves. This implies a distinction between design as envisaged by a designer, and our perception of design when we observe objects in use. In order to explain the nature of the historical evolution of industrial design, it is necessary to include discussion of the organizational and social contexts that provided the stimulus for the conception of designs, and the material and institutional frameworks that were necessary for their realization. However, this does not imply that the work of designers should be considered solely as an expression of such contextual factors: the conception of a design is not\_simply a representation in visual form of predetermined values, but a creative, catalytic process in which external factors interact with the beliefs, talents and skills of individual designers or design-groups. The influence of external factors is generally greatest in establishing parameters for the utilitarian function of a design – that is, the criteria by which it will be judged suitable for an intended working purpose. Individual creativity is generally predominant in determining the extent to which the resulting form offers aesthetic experience and has a psychological or symbolic function. One of the most outstanding post-war British designers, Misha Black, affirmed the designers' own view of their role: 'That creativity is the foundation of their work, is the faith that motivates all designers . . . to exist at all as a designer, a belief in at least a modicum of personally possessed creative ability is as necessary as it is for a brick-layer to have confidence in his capability of laying a straight course of bricks. When manufactured, however, a design as a tangible artefact becomes part of the physical reality of its time, applied for specific purposes in a society that conditions how its form is perceived and evaluated. This evaluation may be based on premises different from those of the designer and producer, and it will be argued that the values attributed to designs in their social function are not fixed and absolute, but fluctuating and conditional. It is plainly impossible to present in one volume even a representative selection of the multifarious range of design over a period of many decades. The text therefore seeks to survey significant general trends in the history of industrial design, and to convey the plurality of the forces and influences that have shaped its forms and characterized its social role. The specific examples discussed have, in many cases, been selected as typical of these themes and influences, rather than as uniquely representative. Although my own preferences and prejudices will be apparent, the intention in this book is not to advocate a particular viewpoint, but to stimulate an understanding of how and why the objects that surround us are as they are, and to provide an outline into which readers can interpolate their own perceptions of the objects of their daily lives. 