N THE PAsT few years, several social thinkers in France and Italy have confronted the reign of mass culture as largely and searchingly as possible while we in the English-speaking world have tended to narrow this subject to violence on television, the sexual ethics of rock stars, or the vices and virtues of an urban landscape increasingly resembling Disneyland. Perhaps the most provocative of these new European writers on mass society is the French philosopher Gilles Lipovetsky; in several books he has sought to explore the effect of mass culture on the practice of democracy. Does mass culture in fact create passive citizens incapable of political reasoning. as Tocqueville believed, today voting only for the candidate who simulates a movie star's version of The Statesman? Are the weak and unstable social bonds of people in a mass society necessarily a bad thing? Lipovetsky. a young writer who follows in the footsteps of the critic Roland Barthes and the sociologist Edgar Morin, has yet to crystallize a firm and fixed answer to these questions, but on the one hand, he has moved far beyond the celebration of mass culture as popular expression that rules much of the contemporary discourse of “cultural studies" in the English-speaking world, and on the other hand, he is anything but a conservative holding his nose at how the present smells, hoping to inhale again the perfumes of the past. His books see-saw between a pessimistic reading of the democratic possibilities of mass culture, as in The Empty Era. and the peculiar hopes for the future rendered in this book, The Empire of Fashion. Many English-speaking readers, I think, will find The Empire of Fashion as maddening as it is stimulating. This sociological tract celebrating the ephemeral and the playful aspects of modern society is written in a language of high seriousness, Immanuel Kant and St. Augustine rubbing shoulders with Pierre Cardin and the Red Hot Chili Peppers. Lipovetsky has based his arguments on the history of fashion, which the author believes is the leading edge of superficial experience, yet this is history such as few Anglo-Saxon historians would write it: the author often zig-zags over two thousand years in a single bound; his facts frequently cascade over each other; and he talks variously about clothing, bodily deportment, sex roles, sexual practices, political rhetoric, stage costume and set design, or acting techniques all as “fashion." The author calls upon his readers to put away outmoded tools of thinking like class analysis in favor of more modern toys of social understanding like advertising, yet the author has evidently never written an ad, sewn a hemline, or sold a shoe. The divide between Anglo-Saxon empirical habits and a perhaps more French manner of seizing hold of social life ought not, however, blind us to the general import and real importance of The Empire of Fashion. For in this book, Lipovetsky tries to see the worth in those aspects of mass society particularly scorned by traditional critics such as Tocqueville and Ortega y Gasset: he tries to understand our consumer-driven, chameleon desires as real desiring, and he seeks to affirm, through the history of fashion, that this modern stream of ephemeral sensations serves something like the common democratic good. "The more progress the ephemeral makes," he declares, "the more stable, profoundly unified and reconciled with their pluralist principles the democracies become. To be sure, this declaration is also an argument he makes to himself. In The Empty Era, Lipovetsky joins the company of writers like the philosopher Elaine Scarry, who believe this taste for ephemeral pleasure expresses in fact a fear of the pains entailed by deep engagement in the world and with oneself, the fear of experiencing disguised by a language of consumer pleasure. Particularly shocking to the traditional liberal reader (I count mvself as one) may be the assertion in The Empire of Fashion that democracy works better, the more superficial the social relations are between people in a democratic polity. Put another way, the author asks what will make it possible for people to live together in some harmony in a world no longer ruled by inherited caste or religious injunctions. Rather than concoct bureaucratic or procedural answers to this question, Lipovetsky deals directly with how people feel about one another: the less they feel, the better they will get along. To ask people to take a deep interest in each other's lives is to invite disaster—people are more likely to say. "I hate who you are" than to say, "let's work together." If this seems perverse. think only of what happens in erotic life, in its many lurches and disastrous turns, its frequent ruptures; a political regime simply cannot afford such jolts, and the only way to prevent them is to make people less mutually engaged, more tolerant because mutually indifferent. Whether he is wrong or right this is the tough-minded core of Lipovetsky's enterprise: his book could equally well have been called An Apology for Indifference. How are people to "achieve" such mutual indifference? This is fashion's role in Lipovetsky's scheme; in the course of Western civilization, fashion in the modern world has served the achievement of democracy by trivializing desire. People who see the world in terms of Gap ads feel very little about it, and about one another, but they see equally and easily; no barriers of caste, education, or indeed taste, stand in the way. Fashion is in this sense a uniform of desire. The author recognizes, of course, that much advertising deals in social distinctions of class and age; his argument, however, is that advertising and other mass-media mechanisms make everyone who looks at a Cartier ad feel, “I want that watch, and I could enjoy it as much as anyone else—if only I had the money." The author argues that this realm of consuming desires weakens anger against those who actually have the money rather than sharpening resentment; in perhaps the most interesting sections of the book, he explains how the phenomena of "difference" in modern society have shifted to the realm of fantasy rather than direct confrontation; in the erotic-tinged realm of consumer fantasy. all differences can be overcome—the man who dreams of the Cartier watch has already possessed it, in a sense, because he has dreamt it into his life. As this brief summary may make clear, Gilles Lipovetsky has radically challenged the assumptions we make in thinking about the social good. He violates. for instance. the classic sociological opposition made by Ferdinand Tonnies between Gesellschaft and Gemeinschaft—impersonal social structure versus intimate social relations. In Lipovetsky's view, the impersonal is the realm of fantasy and desire, structured in such a way that masses of people can get along with one another, whereas the personal is a realm of social rupture, a lack of connection. Lipovetsky challenges Tocqueville's assumptions about democracy: what Tocqueville called the vices of democratic individualism—its weakening of a person's desire to engage in the world—Lipovetsky sees as a genuine virtue; the only way to make diversity work in society is to make people less interested, and so less interfering, in the lives of people unlike themselves. Lipovetsky also challenges the assumptions made by the Frankfurt School about homogenized experience in a modern consumer society. Fashion, he says, may homogenize particular veins of taste; for instance, all jeans may look alike each year. But the economics of the fashion system produces ever more different kinds of goods; in place of the trousers worn by people in premodern societies, today there are jeans, corduroys, bellbottoms, slacks—every brand of each kind of men's pants much like other brands, but the kinds of pants ever more diverse. Similarly, consumer markets segment electronic machines and gadgets, foods, and home furnishings. Thus, the things of the world become at once more homogeneous of kind, and more various in kinds, and this leads—Lipovetsky claims—to greater individuality through consumption even though each object consumed is a cliché. Through the pursuit of fashion, people become complex selves, though this complexity differs radically from the interior, soulful selfhood of the past. Perhaps the most challenging part of Lipovetsky's argument lies here: is a new form of individuality coming into being, one created by surface complexity of desire rather than by deepening of the soul? His proposal can be understood as taking to one extreme the idea of a secular self, a self no longer obliged to search for the secrets of faith, and the relation of faith to worldly desire; Lipovetsky's individual is liberated from all truth bevond the stimulating flicks of the desire to taste, own, consume. To be sure, even in this book Lipovetsky pulls back from a pure celebration of this state of affairs. “The consummate reign of fashion smooths over social conflict, but it deepens subjective and intersubjective conflict; it allows more individual freedom, but it generates greater malaise in living." The reason for this is that the human capacity to desire far outstrips those icons of desire which can be so smoothed and shaped that they can be easily desired by all. "The euphoria of fashion has its counterparts."the author declares, “in dereliction, depression, and existential anguish." The author leaves us there. What does this "existential anguish" mean about democracy? Does a politics of mutual toleration require privatized suffering? Could the political sphere possibly do something about that anguish? Lipovetskv's book unfolds like a fashion show, with Democracy. Subjectivity, Media, and Desire appearing down the runway as so many supermodels, each possessing the supermodel's gift of "the walk." that ability to show off to all sides of a crowded room. And vet when these high-priced bodies reach the end of the runwav. they do something surprising, perhaps surprising most of all their designer: thev break into speech. They are unhappy, they are human beings: more than to be desired, they want to be respected. If, when they burst into speech. we have to attend to them in another way, it is Gilles Lipovetsky's gift no