The Progressive Shifting of the Social hE REIGn of generalized fashion brings into sharp focus the enigma of togetherness that characterizes the democratic age. What we must try to understand is how a society based on the fashion form can get people to coexist. How can such a society institute a social bond when it is constantly broadening the sphere of subjective autonomv, increasing individual difference, emptying social regulatory principles of their transcendent substance, dissolving the unity of life-styles and opinions? By thoroughly restructuring both the production and the circulation of objects and culture under the influence of seduction, ephemera, and marginal differentiation. consummate fashion has overturned the economy of interpersonal relations. It has generalized a new type of encounter and relation among social units. Consummate fashion marks the mature stage of the democratie social state. As a corollary to this unprecedented form of social cohesion, fashion has developed a new relation to duration, a new orientation of social time. The time frame that has always governed fashion—the present—is being increasingly generalized. Fashion society has definitively liquidated the power of the past as embodied in the universe of tradition. It has also inflected the investment in the future that characterized the eschatologica age of ideologies. We are living in a time of short-term programs. perpetually changing standards, aud exhortations to live for the moment. The present has taken over as the principal axis of social duration. ## The Apotheosis of the Social Present Now that fashion has ceased to refer exclusively to the domain of ephemera and has come to designate an overall logic and social temporality, it is useful and even necessary to take another look at the work that went furthest to clarify the problem, that of Gabriel de Tarde. Tarde was the first to succeed in carrying the theory of fashion beyond frivolous appearances, the first to give the subject of fashion conceptual dignity by acknowledging its specific social logic and social temporality. He was the first to see fashion as a general form of sociality, and the first to define entire epochs and civilizations through the principle of fashion itself. For Tarde. fashion is essentially a form of human relationship, a social relationship characterized by the imitation of one's contemporaries and the love of foreign novelties. Society exists only by virtue of a common stock of ideas and desires. The resemblance among human beings is what institutes the social bond, to such an extent that Tarde can assert that "society is imitation."1 Fashion and custom are the two great forms of imitation: they allow the assimilation of individuals to society. When the influence of one's forebears yields to the suggestions of innovators, ages of custom give way to ages of fashion. Whereas in ages of custom one obeys rules handed down from generation to generation, in ages of fashion one imitates novelties from elsewhere. as well as people from one's immediate surroundings.2 Fashion is a social logic independent of its content. All behavior and institutions are susceptible to being carried away by the fashion spirit, by fascination with what is new. Two rigorously correlative principles characterize fashion in Tarde's eyes: on the one hand, interpersonal relations. governed by the imitation of contemporary models; on the other hand. a legitimate new temporality, the social present, which is accurately illustrated by the motto of fashion eras, “everything new is beautiful." In eras when fashion dominates, the traditional past is no longer the object of devotion. The current moment galvanizes people's awareness. Novelties have prestige: change and the present are venerated. By contrasting the periods in which fashion reigns to periods ruled by custom, Tarde powerfully emphasizes that fashion is much more than a frivolous institution. Fashion entails a specific temporality and a specific sociality. Despite this major theoretical advance, Tarde did not succeed in grasping the link that makes fashion consubstantial with modern societies. In his search for universal laws of imitation and their irreversible progress Tarde did not recognize fashion as an exclusive invention of the modern West; he saw it rather as an inevitable and cyclical form of social imitation. In this view. fashion is an invariant principle in humanity's vast historical trajectory; it appears as a transitory and revolutionary phase between two ages of custom. Social life is universally and necessarily punctuated by traditionalist phases in which the imitation of ancient and autochthonous models arises, and by fashion phases marked by waves of imitation of foreign novelties, waves that disrupt the customary equilibrium. “Imitation, which was at first custom-imitation and then fashionimitation, turns back again to custom. . . . This general formula . . . sums up the whole development of every civilization."3 Furthermore, this formula applies more to the various stages of social life taken one by one— language, religion, morality, needs, government—than to the collective whole, for only in rare historical moments does fashion imitation conquer all spheres of social activity simultaneously (as it did in Greece in the fifth century B.c., in Florence in the fifteenth century, in Paris in the sixteenth centurv, and in Europe as a whole in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries).† Trapped in a transhistoric concept of fashion, 'Tarde proceeded to extend the concept too broadly. He glossed over the historical discontinuity that it brings about; he applied it to types of civilizations in which social mechanisms tend to forestall its emergence. However, this did not prevent him from observing with lucidity the exceptional scope of fashion contagions in modern democratic societies.“The eighteenth century inaugurated the reign of fashion on a large scale.... we are unquestionably passing through a period of fashion-imitation, one which is preeminently remarkable for its breadth and permanency."5 No matter how powerful the waves of fashion may be. in Tarde's view, the prestige of forebears still continues to take precedence over that of novelty: it is a matter of social persistence. Even in the modern societies that are most susceptible to passing fads, the role of the traditional element is always preponderant; the prestige of ancestors is superior to that of innovators. “Imitation, then, that is engaged in the currents of fashion is but a very feeble stream compared with the great torrent of custom. And this must necessarily be so."º No social cohesion is possible without a community of beliefs, without similarities of hearts and minds. To keep the chain of generations unbroken, to keep children from being strangers to their parents, the respect for the old beliefs has to be maintained. Imitation of the same models from the past allows the generations to continue to resemble one another and to form a single society. The preeminence of tradition is a societal constant, a categorical imperative of the social bond. and this is the case no matter what fashion upheavals and crises may come into play. At the time 'Tarde was writing, at the end of the nineteenth century, this analysis was probably justified. Fashion had not vet reached its fullest extension; it allowed large areas of collective life to subsist under the yoke of tradition and the authority of the past. However, the analysis cannot be reintroduced unchanged at a time when so much—economy, culture, meaning, everyday life—is governed by the ephemeral and by seduction. With consummate fashion, a critical mutation in the axis of social temporality has come about, a reversal in the distribution of strengths between fashion and custom. For the first time, the fashion spirit is winning out over tradition virtually everywhere; novelty is coming out ahead of inheritance. As fashion comes to encompass broader and broader spheres of collective life, the reign of tradition is eclipsed. It no longer represents anything but “a very feeble torrent" compared to the "great river" of fashion. This is something new in history: our societies now function outside the power of the past to regulate and integrate; the axis of the present has become the socially prevalent temporality. Everywhere we look, the phenomena of fads and the logic of inconstancy are developing; everywhere, the new is manifestly appreciated and valued. The standards that socialize us and guide our behavior are fluctuating standards, continually realized in new forms. The empire of fashion designates this immense inversion of social temporality that consecrates the preeminence of the present with respect to the past: it marks the advent of a social space buttressed by the present-—which is precisely the time frame of fashion. If fashion rules us, it is because the past is no longer the norm that governs every detail of our actions. tastes, and beliefs. The ancient decrees are largely discredited as guides to behavior: the examples we follow come increasingly from around us in a precarious environment. In every realm—education, knowledge, hygiene. consumption. sports, human relations, leisure—we find our models here and now: they are not behind us. The ancestral legacy no longer structures behavior and opinions, by and large. The imitation of forebears has yielded to the imitation of moderns; the spirit of custom has given way to the spirit of novelty. Fashion is in charge, because the love of novelty has become general. regular. limitless; "curiosity has become a fatal, irresistible passion." as Baudelaire remarked. In most areas, individuals are engaged in a passionate quest for novelty; veneration of the immutable past has been replaced by the follies and fads of fashion. More than ever before. we are governed by the motto “everything new is beautiful.' Fashion is our law because our entire culture holds the new sacred and consecrates the dignity of the present—not only in technology, art, and knowledge but in our very way of life, which has been reordered according to hedonistic values. Characterized by the legitimizing of well-being and material enjoyment, by free and guilt-free sexuality, by invitations to live life more fully, to satisfy one's desires, to “get the most out of life," hedonistic culture orients human beings toward the existential present. It exacerbates fads and the search for individual salvation in the new, presenting novelties as stimulations and sensations apt to produce a rich and accomplished life. The reign of the past has not been abolished, but it has been neutralized, now that it is subject to the unchallenged requirement of individual, personal satisfaction. This preponderance of the social present is only the culminating point of the age-old secular transformation of the relation to time that has caused modern societies to mutate as they shift toward the futurist age Centuries ago our societies began to put in motion an immense “shifting of time" that detaches us from fidelity to the past and orients us more and more toward the future. Accompanying the development of capitalism, science, and the modern nation, an unprecedented temporal logic has been established: the legitimacy of the foundational past characteristic of traditionalist societies has vielded to the legitimacy of the organization of the future.? There is no doubt, indeed, that administration of and responsibility for the future by various political and economic agencies is the basis for modern societies. There is no doubt, either, that the administrative democratic state, relieved of all transcendent references, is most profoundly legitimized by its ability to prepare an open future and to orchestrate collective change. Yet this orientation and this futurist legitimization shed no light on the nature of the social temporality that characterizes democratic societies in the age of consummate fashion. If public and economic powers are oriented toward management of the future, and if reference to the future has become constitutive of the operations of the state and of capital ism. interpersonal space for its part turns out to be increasingly dependent on the dictates of the present. On the one hand. there is the futurist organization of change: on the other, the love of novelties, fads. and trends. ever-wider fluctuations in the imitation of contemporaries. the precariousness of collective standards. The modern era can certainly be defined in terms of investment in and legitimization of the future, provided we add that, in a parallel development, a certain type of social regulation guarantees the preeminence and the legitimacy of the present. This is all the more perceptible since, in recent vears, society's orientation toward the future has lost the detailed and definitive character that the great messianic ideologies used to confer on it.8 Our vision of the future is no longer clear and distinct. The future appears blurry and open; by the same token, the idea of a pure, hard-line, political program preparing it is losing credibility. What we require now is flexibility, the ability to navigate by sight, to correct our positions rapidly in a world without predetermined dynamies. We find the same primacy of the present in the economie sphere, where the great dream of industrial policies is over. The rapidity of technological change implies mobility in decision making from now on. along with increasingly rapid adaptation to the sovereign marketplace, an aptitude for flexibility and experimentation under risky conditions. 'The management of the future has entered the orbit of the short term, a permanent state of urgency. The supremacy of the present is not in contradietion to the orientation toward the future; it only achieves that orientation, accentuates the tendency of our societies to shed the heavy burden of inheritance and to constitute themselves as virtually "experimental" systems. The reign of the present reflects the collapse of the demiurgic ideologies, the accelerated invention of tomorrow, the capacity of our societies to criticize themselves to navigate without a preestablished model, to hasten the work of demo cratic autoproduction. The supremacy of fashion signifies less the annihilation of tradition than the loss of its constraining collective power. A good number of customs have persisted: marriage, holidays, gift giving, cooking, religion, manners; however, they no longer succeed in imposing compulsory rules of social conduct. Standards inherited from the past persist without group coercion, but they are now subject to the influence of autonomous subjectivities. People continue to celebrate Christmas, but on ski slopes or southern beaches, or in front of a television set. Young women still wear white at their weddings, but by their own free choice: it is a matter of aesthetic pleasure, a form of play. Religious beliefs and practices are tenacious, but they tend to function à la carte. Italian specialties and French cuisine can be eaten kosher; Judaism itself has entered the supermarket era and leaves room for tinkering with its rites, prayers, and religious symbols—among Reform congregations in the United States, women lead prayers, wear emblems once reserved for men, and can become rabbis. Even if certain traditional forms are perpetuated, adaptation and innovation disrupt age-old continuities everywhere. Traditions are recycled in the register of openness. institutional and individual creativity. The spirit of collective tradition is dead. The present governs our relation to the past. We keep only that part of the past that is convenient for us, only what is not in flagrant contradiction to modern values, personal taste, and conscience. No collective rule has value in itself any longer if it is not expressly recognized by the will of an individual. Under these conditions, customs are dissolving in a process of personalization. They have the charm of days gone by, a past restored less through respect for ancestors than through a spirit of play and a desire for individualist affiliation with a given group. Paradoxically, traditions have become instruments for individualist assertion: collective norms are no longer imposed on me, it is I who deliberately adhere to them, through my personal will to identify with one set or another through my individualist taste for displaying a difference, through my desire for privileged communication with a more or less limited social group. In cultural and artistic matters, our relation to the past is unquestionably more complex. Indeed, the “classic” works are not discredited anywhere, quite the contrary: they are admired and appreciated to the highest degree. Opera and classical music have a broad public of faithful admirers. Major art exhibits (of the works of Raphael, Turner, or Manet, for instance) that have been organized in Paris in recent years have consistently attracted hundreds of thousands of visitors. To say that our society functions in the present does not mean that the past is devalued; it means that the past is no longer a model to reproduce and respect. The past is admired, but it no longer rules. The great works of the past have enormous prestige, but we produce “hits” designed not to last, works with built-in obsolescence. This phenomenon does not involve mass culture alone. With artistic modernism and the avant-gardes, works have explicitly ceased to manifest any connection with the past; all ties with tradition have been severed as art has been opened up to the enterprise of radical rupture and permanent renewal. Avant-garde art has reacted against public taste and aesthetic standards in the name of a limitless creativity and the ultimate value of innovation. At war with academism, “good taste," and repetition, the avant-gardes have produced hermetic, dissonant, dislocated, scandalous works that are at the opposite pole from the logic of fashion and its sub mission to the spirit of the times. If the modernist process was initially modeled on revolutionary escalation, the fashion form has nevertheless succeeded, in a second phase, in absorbing the revolutionary form itself into its register: a structurally hybrid artistic field has been orchestrated. consisting simultaneously of revolt against custom and systematically capricious reversals. On the one side we find the spirit of subversion. on the other the inconstancy of back-and-forth movement, the ostentatious aim of producing what has never been seen before. The development of the avant-gardes has coincided more and more with the preponderance of the fashion form. Art has seen the search for originality and novelty run ram pant no matter what the cost; deconstructionist chic, the sophisticated vogue for minimal art and conceptual art, the proliferation of "non-art gimmicks (happenings, actions and performances, body art, landscape art, and so on) are based more on excess, paradox. gratuitousness. plav. or outrageousness than on revolutionary radicalism. The artistic scene has shifted into an age of accelerated obsolescence: artists and avant-garde groups proliferate, only to be immediately used up, forgotten, replaced by other trends that are still more "in." The artistic sphere has become the theater of a frivolous revolution that no longer disturbs anvone: there is a great deal of theoretical posturing, but there are few actual ruptures. In stead of the profound upheavals that took place in the early part of this century, we find a multiplicity of micronovelties and marginal variations: instead of the conquests of the great historical avant-gardes, we find repetitious modernist academism and the immobility of pseudo-differences Even while continuing to resort to the alibi of subversion. the tranquil comfort of fashion has won out over revolutionary discontinuitv. Art is structured more and more by the ephemeral imperatives of the present, by the need to create an event, by the inconstancy of the vogues orchestrated by merchants and relayed by the media. The gap between creation in fashion and creation in art grows smaller and smaller. While artists no longer succeed in creating scandals, fashion shows seek to be more and more creative; there are now as many innovations and surprises in fashion as in the fine arts. 'The democratie age has succeeded in dissolving the hierarchical division of the arts by subjecting them equally to the order of fash ion. Exaggerated originality, show, and marketing are winning out every where. The postmodern moment (or "trans-avant-garde," "free figuration," return to tradition, and so on) has not modified the ongoing process at all. By valorizing the reprise of the past and the artistic tradition, contemporary art perfects its transformation into fashion. As soon as breaking with the past is no longer an absolute imperative, one can mix styles in works that are baroque, ironic, more accessible (as in the case of postmodern architectures). Modernist austerity is declining in favor of the frontierless mixing of old and new. Art becomes concerned with effect; it seeks the complicitous nod, the "second-degree" ludic combinations and recombinations. Everything can come back; all the forms of the imaginary museum can be exploited, can contribute to the increasingly rapid declassification of what is in the forefront. Art has joined the fashion cycle of ephemeral oscillation between neo and retro, variations in which nothing is at stake and nothing is condemned; art no longer excludes, it recycles. Revival has become a recipe: there are the neofauves, the neoexpressionists. and before long no doubt there will be the neoneoabstractionists. Having abandoned the code of modernist rupture, art has no more reference points at all. no more evaluative criteria. Everything is possible, including starting over "in the manner of so-and-so," if one toys with an out-of-phase imitation of the past. Art is now better able to adopt the frivolous rhythins of the eternal return of forms, the speeded-up and tension-free dance of stylistic renewal. Whatever the postmodernists may claim, the artistic new is not a devalued value, and it is certainly no longer the same "new" that the "classic" avant-gardes were targeting; it is much closer to the “new” that governs fashion. ## Conflict and Social Bonds As individuals attempt to resemble their contemporaries instead of their ancestors, they increasingly imitate models from outside family groups and the environment of origin. Multiple influences are coming into play replacing the closed determinism of bodies, classes, and countries. Consummate fashion corresponds to “the free and unimpeded domain of imitation,"9 the social state in which mimetic contagions accelerate and operate beyond the closed realms of class and nation. Classes, nations, and age groups may still determine specific behaviors; however, influences of this type are less and less exclusive and one-sided. With the decompartmentalization and opening of mimetic trends, the democratic revolution is pursuing its work: it eradicates watertight separations between classes and countries; it erodes the principle of aristocratic influence and the monopoly certain high-status groups have exercised in terins of influence. The closed, global imitation characteristic of traditional eras is replaced by individual and partial imitation. We imitate this but not that; we copy one thing from one person and something else from another. Our borrowings no longer have a fixed origin; they are taken from myriad sources. Far from adding up to a uniformity of behavior, practice, and taste, the empire of fashion is tantamount to the personalization of individuals. In eras of custom, few people are imitated, but they are imitated in everything. In our societies it is just the opposite. Here I can do no less than cite Tarde's text in full, in its unsurpassable accuracy: "What is contrary to personal preeminence is the imitation of a single man whom people copy in everything. But when, instead of patterning one's self after one person or after a few, we borrow from a hundred, a thousand. or ten thousand persons. each of whom is considered under a particular aspect, the elements of thought or action which we subsequently combine, the very nature and choice of these elementary copies, as well as their combination, expresses and accentuates our original personality."10 How could one really endorse the idea, then. "that a fully democratic social state is a state in which there are, as it were, no more individual influences?"11 To be sure, the Tocquevillean analysis is on target when it notes the progressive retreat of the powerful and lasting influence of families and groups. But that retreat does not mean that individual influences decline or disappear. Democratic society lets loose waves of imitation. and multiplies them; individual influences are less profound. but they are lasting and diverse. It is true that the great intellectual leaders are waning. that the authority of the masters is being eclipsed, that the higher classes are no longer preeminent models, that the stars themselves are no longer the magnetic poles they once were. But at the same time microscopic influences are proliferating; examples in kit form are taken from hither and yon. The welfare state governed by fashion is characterized on the one hand by the eclipse of the great controlling authorities. and on the other by the dissemination of small influences that are sometimes determining and sometimes superficial. It is an era of precarious influences à la carte. The end of tradition, the instability of standards of socialization. the hyperindividualization of human beings: consummate fashion, as the ultimate stage of the modern welfare state, simply raises with greater insistence the question of what holds contemporary societies together. How can a society made up of free and independent units, with no substantial bond of sociability, be recognized as a society? How can a society liberated from the traditional bonds of community constituted by autonomous, floating, increasingly self-directed individuals escape the process of disintegration? The question has all the more resonance given that the democratic universe, far from relying on similarity of opinions and unity of beliefs, continually opens up numerous foyers of dissension, new conflicts of ideas and values. 'The unity of reference points has vanished; our societies are inseparable from permanent antagonisms of meaning. To be sure, the democratic societies are not at the zero-degree point on the values scale; freedom and equality in particular constitute the basis for a common ideal. But as abstract principles that are open to fundamental contrary interpretations, the major referents of the democratic age only stimulate a limitless process of criticism, discord, and renewed questioning of the established order. Even if the epoch of great political divisions and excommunications contemporary with the religious era of ideologies has in fact vielded to a universal consensus about democratic institutions and the imperatives of a strictly managed economy, we are by no means in a unified phase. Basic cleavages, major differences, irreconcilable viewpoints are at the heart of our debates: the image of a society “where differences of view are only matters of nuance"12 cannot be applied to us. We have buried the hatchet of war over the dictatorship of the proletariat and the revolution. but new antagonisms have arisen: the death penalty, immigration, prisons. abortion. drugs, euthanasia, nuclear power, artificial insemination. social protection. surrogate motherhood, all these are questions on which there is no hope of reaching any measure of unanimity. Our societies are condemned to the tug-of-war of conflicting viewpoints. The era of consummate fashion means many things, but it does not mean uniformity of convictions and behavior. It has indeed homogenized tastes and life-styles in the process of pulverizing the last vestiges of local customs. and it has indeed diffused universal standards of well-being, leisure. human and sexual relations; however, at the same time it has inaugurated an unparalleled process involving the fragmentation of life-styles. Even if hedonism and psychologism are dominant values, life-styles continue to proliferate in countless groupings that sociologists of everyday life attempt to catalogue. Attitudes toward consumption, the family, vacations, the media, work. and leisure activities are less and less uniform; the universe of life-styles has been conquered by disparity. If in our societies we go on widening the differential gaps that separate us in our beliefs and life-styles. what can ensure the stability of the collective body? In an insightful analysis, Marcel Gauchet has shown how democratic society, inherently fragmented at the level of opinion, has succeeded in keeping citizens together in and through their oppositions and divergences. There is no need to follow Tocqueville's example and posit a unity of beliefs based on societal permanence. It is conflict itself, conflict involving social meanings and interests, that works to produce a dimension of community belonging. Divisions and social antagonisms create a symbolic social bond; they solder people together, in that the opposing parties continue to define themselves in terms of a shared world, they assert themselves as members of one and the same society, and they have a common stake in the way that society is to be transformed. Conflict is a means for getting individuals to participate, a way of implicating them in the definition of a common universe; it is thus a factor of socialization, social inclusion, and social cohesion.13 Still, does social conflict maintain its pronounced integrative role when political parties lose their credibility on a large scale, when deunionization accelerates, when collective struggles become more sporadic and the cult of private life prevails? Social division plaved an undeniable assimilative role during the great historical struggles that established the features of the modern democracies. But today? Conflicts over public issues no longer have the character of holy wars; they no longer bring visions of irreconcilable worlds into confrontation; most often they mobilize collective passions only intermittently. The integrative force of social conflict is on the wane; it is far from sufficient to account for the cohesiveness of contemporary societies. At present, social unity is maintained less through frontal opposition between citizens than through the neutralization of conflicts; it is perpetuated less by way of antagonisms than by way of individualist pacification of the collective debate. We are held together as societies by our democratic mores; these are the cement of our durability. While ideological and political rifts remain numerous, not only do they not succeed in shattering the social body, but they give rise only rarely to bloody confrontations. We do not see eye to eye, but we do not get out our guns: we do not try to make the other disappear. The cohesiveness of any collective body is inseparable from the extraordinary taming of conflict, the pacifving of individual and collective behavior that stems from the development of individualist values—respect for life, respect for and indifference to the other—and from the privatization of existences produced by the reign of fashion.1 Even mass unemployment and terrorist attacks have not succeeded in disrupting individual and collective behavior patterns. which are for the most part tolerant and peaceful. Western Europeans can coexist in a heterogeneity of viewpoints because contemporary mores are governed by a peace ful relativism, because everything that relates to physical violence is rejected at a visceral level. The political leadership may go on talking in terms of irreducible opposition on occasion, but civil society remains astonishingly calm, resistant to the warfare of political and ideological harassment. If fashion's reign hastens the splintering of the social element, it simultaneously reconstitutes an invaluable bond of sociability by fostering the rooting out of antagonisms, by advancing the age-old process by which the mores constitutive of modern times become gentler, by reinforcing the taste for civil peace and the respect for democratic rules. Social divisions are no longer explosive; they function like fashion, in a nondramatic mode of marginal differences. Even radically antithetical viewpoints no longer give rise to inhibiting exclusions; underlying ideological differences do not succeed in breaking the social bond. Social conflict is structured like fashion: the major oppositions coexist with great civility. It is as if only superficial divergences were at stake: the ultimate reign of fashion inscribes as marginal difference what is in reality a disjunction of principles. We have to restore mores to their rightful place in the maintenance of democratic societies. The collective whole stays together only through a process of socialization that develops calm, individualist, democratic passions—only through a massively tolerant life-style. Tocqueville's lesson must be heeded: "If in the course of this book I have not succeeded in making the reader feel the importance I attach to the practical experience of the Americans, to their habits, opinions, and, in a word, their mores, in maintaining their laws, I have failed in the main object of my work."15 If the apotheosis of fashion works to reinforce civil peace, it certainly does not preclude the eruption of social conflicts. These are often limited in scope (as in the case of strikes by specific categories of workers), but they may also be quite broad-based, as in recent years in France with movements against proposed changes in legislation affecting private schools and public higher education. Contemporary individualism does not rule out participation in collective struggles, but it changes the tenor of those struggles. It is simplistic to reduce contemporary individualism to egocentrism. narcissistic froth, the mere quest for personal enjoyment. Narcissism is the dominant penchant of democracies; it is not their exclusive orientation. From time to time, social struggles do arise, but far from being antithetical to the individualist dynamic, they reproduce its values and its features. Even when individuals move out of their strictly private universe and get involved in collective actions, individualist logic remains preponderant. Generally speaking: private interests win out over general considerations: individual autonomy prevails over doctrinal orthodoxy; the desire for immediate improvement of living conditions prevails over unconditional devotion: free participation prevails over conscription; "I've-had-it-up-to-here" prevails over militancy. Hyperindividualist society does not mean the disappearance of social conflict and the simple smothering of the res publica; it signifies the development of collective actions in which individuals are no longer subordinated to a higher order that dictates the tenor of their ideas and actions. Consummate individualism reverses the relation of individual submission to doctrines and mass parties in favor of free social actions, largely unpredictable and spontaneous, triggered more by the initiative of the grass roots or of civil society than by that of parties and unions. The requirement of personal autonomy is rediscovered in collective actions, which now originate independently of the great labor unions and political organizations. Collective movemnents have not been reduced to nothing, but have become more and more depoliticized, deideologized, and deunionized; they are supported by individualist demands for improvement in buying power and working conditions, but also by demands for individual freedoms in action and in civil society In Western Europe, the reign of the ego is not being established in a social desert; it has colonized the sphere of collective action itself, a sphere less and less hemmed in by the classic apparatuses that had directed social struggles, more and more buttressed by the direct preoccupations of individuals: the defense of private interests, the demand for the freedom to live as one pleases right now, far removed from the great historical and utopian hopes of the ideological age. On the one hand, contemporary society entails ever-increasing personal desires for freedom and personal accomplishment; on the other hand, it entails social explosions provoked by individualist motivations and demands: buying power, job security. fringe benefits, individual freedoms. Social actions reproduce the individualist motivations of private life. The tendency to reversal that defines the new democratic age is at work everywhere: we see it in the preeminence of corporatist interests over great global projects, and in the primacy of personal autonomy over the discipline of the great militant organizations and over the ideological direction of consciences. The forms of collective mobilization do not run counter to individualism; they are its corollaries and its reflection, its other face: perhaps less obvious, less immediately readable. but just as revealing of the irrepressible rise of the reign of the individual. In May 1968, in France, individualist passions were celebrated on city walls. “It is forbidden to forbid." Individualism sought to change the world, to change life. Today, it has settled down and become "responsible," limited to demands like "keep your hands off my university" and "never again." It has gotten rid of the utopian matrix and it rejects al political perspectives, all party affiliations, all overarching worldviews. Mobilizations have concrete, targeted, achievable objectives in the short run, and, whatever may be claimed in this regard, they are driven less by an abstract ideal of equality than by a demand for individual autonomy and by personal anxiety in face of the future. The scope of the wave of protests by French high school and university students in the early 198os can be fully understood only if it is related to young people's anxiety about their future. Where will they be able to go to college? Will they be able to afford it? Will they make it through? What other choices do they have? The movement has been considerably idealized and inflated by those who speak of "children with a heart," of a "generation of solidarity": whatever degree of generosity the movement may entail, the complexity of motivations ought to make us more reserved in our judgments. ln fact, the student movements of the 198os brought no evidence of a struggle against competitive individualist society and its flagrant inequalities; quite to the contrary, it brought evidence of the individualist desire to be integrated into society as it is, with its hierarchies and its injustices—the desire not to wait outside the door, not to foreclose the possibility of earning recognized diplomas, of being better placed in the competitive job market, of making more of one's life. The "generation of solidarity" can come to terms quite readily with the prevailing indifference toward the have-nots, with the society of business and careers, with the quest for personal enjoyment. It is true that solidarity movements of an explicitly moral cast appeared around the same time; in France, SOS Racisme, Band Aid, Restaurants du Coeur, Sport Aid, and antiapartheid movements are examples. All these manifestations appear to have nothing in common with the reign of fashion and the individualist quest for well-being. However, here again the opposition is not so radical as it seems at first. The generalization of the fashion process is what has made such movements possible: by making the great historico-social utopias obsolete and replacing them with individual values. the frivolous age at the same time led to a strengthened concern for human rights and increased sensitivity to the familiar, concrete human drama of famine. The more individuals are socialized in the direction of personal autonomy, the more compelling the imperative of human rights becomes. The more society progresses toward hedonistic individualism, the more human individuality appears as an ultimate value. The more the historical megadiscourses crumble, the more life and respect for persons are established as absolutes. The more violence regresses in social mores the more sacred the individual becomes. People do not join movements on behalf of systems: they are moved by the ignominy of racism, by the hellish situation of human beings condemned to hunger and physical degradation. The paradox deserves to be highlighted: the new charity is swept along by the euphoric and individualistic waters of fashion. Contemporary individualism is inconceivable apart from democratic reference points; it is thinkable only in the framework of a society in which there is profound commitment to the values of freedom and equality, and in which the primordial value is precisely the individual. To the extent that the reign of fashion shatters the superstructures of historical meaning, the leading ideals of democracy appear in the front rank and become an essential driving force for any mass action. Not only is contemporary solidarity a child of the mature reign of fashion. but it also reproduces some of fashion's basic characteristics, most notably hedonism. No activist movement today is unacquainted with spectacle, show business, a focus on the participants' pleasure. We have become allergic to platitudes as well as to sermonizing; we require parties, rock concerts, good-humored parades bristling with slogans whose tone reflects that of humorous advertising. The actors on today's social stage espouse the universe of images, spectacles, the media, the star system, fashion, and advertising. Two million badges saying "Touche pas à mon pote!" (Hands off my buddy!) were sold in France within the space of a few months; then that frenzy began to fade. “Moral" commitment is at the same time emotional, "“tuned-in," funny, festive, sports-related, musical. It is impossible not to see the globally weightless and ephemeral character of these forms of participation: apart from a declining number of militants, how many people do anything beyond buying a button or a bumper sticker, attending a concert or running a race, buying a record? Commitment of bodv and soul has been replaced by participation in passing, à la carte. People spend as much time and money as they like, they mobilize when and as they wish, in keeping with the primary desire for individual autonomy, Our era is one of minimal commitment, echoing the minimal ideology of human rights and the sensitization to the ravages of poverty. The fashion spirit has managed to penetrate the heart of the democratic individual; it has infiltrated the sphere of solidarity and ethics. The fashion age does not lead to consummate egoism, but to sporadic. flexible. nondoctrinaire commitment that requires no sacrifice. Fashion's reign is not a cause for despair; it broadens the path of human rights and opens people's eves to human misfortune. We have less doctrinaire rigidity but more humanitarian concern; we manifest less ethical self-denial but more respect for life; we are less faithful but, as a group, more spontaneous—all of which produces neither the best of worlds nor the worst. We should not take heart too quickly, however. The age of accomplished fashion is inseparable from the increasing breakdown of the community and from the deficit in intersubjective communication. More or less everywhere, people are complaining that they are not understood. that they are not listened to, that they cannot express themselves. Anemic social relations, difficulty understanding one another. a feeling that people talk only about themselves and do not listen to one another. all these are characteristic features of the final age of fashion. of the formidable thrust of individualist existences and aspirations. The dissolving of social identities, the diversification of tastes, the sovereign requirement of being oneself are all factors contributing to a relational impasse, an unparalleled crisis in communication. "Formal," stereotvped, conventional exchange is less and less satisfying; we want free, sincere, personal communication, and at the same time we want renewal in our relationships. We suffer not only from the rhythm and the organization of modern life, we also suffer from our insatiable appetite for personal accomplishment and for communication; we suffer from the endless demands we each make on others. The more we insist on our right to a genuine, authentic, rich exchange, the more we are condemned to the feeling that our communication is superficial. 'The more people reveal of their intimate selves. the more they open themselves up to others, the more they feel that intersubjective communication is a fleeting phenomenon. The more we assert our desires for independence and personal self-realization, the more intersubjectivity is condemned to turbulence and noncommunication. As it invades the sphere of being-for-others, fashion reveals the hidden dimension of its empire: the drama of intimacy is at the very heart of the delight in novelty. Fashion is neither angel nor devil; there is also a tragic lightness established as a social system, a tragic dimension that cannot be eliminated at the level of subjective units. The consummate reign of fashion pacifies social conflict, but it deepens subjective and intersubjective confliet: it allows more individual freedom, but it generates greater malaise in living. The lesson is a harsh one: the progress of enlightenment and the progress of happiness do not go hand in hand. The euphoria of fashion has its counterparts in dereliction, depression, and existential anguish. We encounter more stimulations of all sorts, but also more anxiety; we have more personal autonomy. but also more personal crises. Such is the greatness of fashion. which always refers us, as individuals, back to ourselves; such is the misery of fashion. which renders us increasingly problematic to ourselves and others. uBLication of the English translation of L'Empire de l’éphémère provides an opportunity not only to review the two fundamental aimns of the original work but also to assess its conclusions in light of the social and cultural changes that have taken place since the book came out in 1987. My primary goal in L'Empire de l'ephémère was to offer a new interpretation of fashion in a broad historical perspective, breaking sharply with the hegemonic epistemological model inherited from the nineteenth century and regularly adopted by historians and sociologists ever since: namely, the paradigm of syıbolic class struggle and competition. or—as it has come to be called in the wake of Pierre Bourdieu's work—the logic of distinction. A theoretical updating was needed because the model of social distinction had proved unable to account either for the historical invention of fashion in the fourteenth century or for the major organizational. behavioral, and aesthetic mutations that orchestrated its historical development. I did not seek to deny the impact of competition for social rank on fashion: rather, I sought to demonstrate that such competition has less explanatory value than the modern individualist ethic that has been present exclusively in the West for more than six centuries. This conceptual revision took place in a specific intellectual context that it may be useful to spell out here. Starting in the mid-197os. certain French thinkers have tended to recast the issue of individualism as a nodal phenomenon constitutive of modern democratie societies. 'This point warrants some clarification. The problem of individualism unquestionably has a long intellectual history, traversed by the great names in sociology. But as it happened, until the 197os, the idea of individualism was generally identified with the principle of economie and democratic freedom; it was not singled out for serious conceptual, historical, or sociological analysis. The concept of individualism made it possible to characterize liberal systems in opposition to totalitarian collectivities; it funetioned more as a label than as a problematic concept. Following lines suggested by Tocqueville, the works of Louis Dumont and Marcel Gauchet have been of critical importance.1 These works have reopened the issue of individualism by making the rediscovery of the individual the key to understanding modernity and its metamorphoses. In this context, individualism ceases to be mistaken for petit bourgeois ethos; it can be understood as a crucial factor underlying the ideological, political and anthropological originality of modern societies. For Dumont, individualism designates not only the ideology characteristic of democratic equality but also a specific social state accompanied by social mores and interpersonal relations that have no equivalent in the past. By the same token what has been most obvious in modernity (the values of equality and individual freedom) becomes what is most fundamental: no longer reduced to a class-bound ideological mystification, the idea of the individual can be accepted as the creative principle of a social and political bond producing ways of life of exceptional historical originality. The effort to conceptualize the individual--and to give conceptual legitimacy and sociopolitical efficacy to the principle of autonomy that is coextensive with the individual—constitutes one of the most innovative and promising trends to appear on the French intellectual scene in opposition to the Marxist, Heideggerian. or Foucaldian tendencies that have dominated interpretations of modernity. The adoption of Dumont's theoretical model opposing holism to individualism and the traditional-hierarchical era to the modern democratic era paved the way for a new interpretation of fashion that avoids recourse to the schema of distinction. What is fashion, indeed, if not a modern social logic instituting a new legitimate temporality—the social present that breaks with the traditional order venerating continuity and fidelity to the past? To the extent that fashion presupposes the social dignifying of the new and by the same token the valorization of individuality, it cannot be detached from the individualist universe, even though it developed over a period of four centuries in aristocratic societies, and that it has been accompanied by class-based phenomenon of mimicry and conformity Fashion as it began to function in the nineteenth century has to be understood as one of the characteristic figures of “democratic revolution." This is still the case today: what we observe in contemporary fashion only emphasizes its democratic and individual aspect. The second goal I was pursuing in L’Empire de l’éphémère focused much more directly on the present: I was seeking to show the new role and new meaning of fashion in contemporary democracies now that fashion has become a general principle restructuring entire facets of society. Hence the notion of "consummate fashion," which is simply an ideal type in Max Weber's sense. While this schema is by no means able to account for the full complexity of our societies, at least it allows us to grasp one of their most original and most paradoxical dimensions. A great number of phenomena indeed lie outside the scope of the fashion form or even run counter to it. But rather than speak in terms of contradictions, I am inclined to point to the paradoxes of our era as so many figures of the reign of generalized fashion. Paradox 1. We speak of the expansion of fashion at the very moment when dress—the characteristic emblem of fashion—is continuing to lose its prestige and when spending on clothes is declining. Between 197o and i992, the percentage of the household budget allocated to dress and clothing in France went from 9.6 percent to 6.2 percent; it is expected to stabilize at around 5 percent in the vear 2ooo.² At a tiıne when more and more women have professional ambitions and activities, and when sportswear is becoming more and more prevalent, interest in fashion persists, yet clothes are losing their ability to elicit social admiration. For the most part. dress has ceased to be a vector of social affirmation and recognition. with the notable exception of certain categories of young people who seek to put their personal or collective identity on display. This does not mean that the logic of appearances has been abandoned; it is rather as though the center of gravity of that logic had been displaced. For the steady decline of clothing is paralleled by an increase in commercial activity linked to a growing preoccupation with the body. After the theatricality of clothing. we have the narcissistic cult of the body: it has its fashions, its aesthetic. dietetic. and athletic models. After the primacv of the social image of the individual we have the primacy of the bodily image—the very emblem of postmodern individualism. From this point on, seduction is incarnated less in attention-getting clothing than in the imperative of youthfulness, beauty. thinness, and vigorous good health. The market sectors that focus on the body tend to become fashion industries themselves, caught up in the process of marginal differentiation and product renewal. For example, proliferating fitness centers sell an increasing variety of "products." In i991, in France. four million people were enrolled in centers offering a wide array of activities, from body building to eutonics and cardio-funk. Cymnasties is no longer a uniform practice: it has evolved into hybrid forms such as stretching, toning. harmonics, and aerobics; endless new fashions, new "personalized" variations keep appearing on the market. ln mountain and water sports, too, a whole palette of new activities has energed: monoski, snow surfing, rafting. hydrospeed. In the United States, the consumption of goods and services devoted to the body has gone up significantly: home exercise equipment was one of the fastest-growing sectors in the consumer economy in the 198os, along with microcomputers and low-calorie foods.3 Participation in sports is growing everywhere. Individuals show increasing concern with maintaining their bodies in the best possible condition. The need to demonstrate one's physical worth, to develop one's muscles, to lose weight, has taken over as an individualist mass ideal. The cult of looks is no longer aimed at a display of rank; it is experienced as a way to stay young, to feel good, to maximize self-confidence. In the era of consummate fashion, the aesthetics of the body has become a matter of psychology and performnance. The beauty market has undergone a similar evolution. In 198o, 50 new perfumes were introduced worldwide; ten years later, the number had gone up to Il4. L'Oréal, ranked number one in the world, has no fewer than 32.000 separate products. In 1992, some 300 new cosmetic products were introduced into the French market. Despite the economic slump, in 1992 in France profits in the cosmetic sector as a whole amounted to 50.7 billion francs. up $8 . 3$ percent from 1991. And the world market, where the overall profits amount to 33o billion francs, appears likely to continue to grow by 4 to 5 percent per year. According to a recent study, Europeans are apt to spend around $^ { 4 4 }$ billion francs on beauty products in 1995, and the Japanese now consume twice as many cosmetic products per capita as Europeans do.+ Breast creams, anti-aging creams, moisturizing lotions, and restructuring creams proliferate, while at the same time liposuction, plastic surgery. and other cosmetic operations are on the rise. By the late 198os. one American woman out of sixty had had breast implants, and plastic surgeons perform roughly 1.5 million operations a year.5 Then there is the new obsession with food, heralded by an unprecedented wave of diets and weight-loss programs. In 1992, 25 percent of all French men and $4 ^ { \mathrm { { c } } }$ percent of French women wanted to lose weight. Seventy-one percent of the women and $4 ^ { 6 }$ percent of the men claimed that they wanted to lose weight primarily for aesthetic reasons. One and a half million French citizens have lost weight thanks to the Weight Watchers program. In the United States. $8 5$ million people are on permanent lowcalorie diets: in 1988. weight-loss programs earned $\$ 5.5$ billion on the American market. and treatments in specialized diet clinics brought in \$io billion.º And "light" products now account for 1o percent of the food products sold in the major European countries, while new food products sold in Japan ("functional foods") claim to have multiple health benefits (toning. relaxation. anticancer. and so on) along with cosmetic benefits (they will make skin more "youthful." complexions more beautiful). In less than five years, such products have already conquered 5 percent of the Japanese food market; their annual profits may climb to $4 0$ billion francs in 1995.7 Thus the theater of appearances has a new configuration. On the one hand. we are witnessing the end of diktats in the realm of dress. By virtue of the overwhelming diversification of “legitimate" styles, fashions in dress have ceased to be compelling or unanimous; no single line now succeeds in imposing itself on women. Women are more inclined to wear what they like, what becomes them, rather than choose fashion for fashion's sake. As evidence, we need only look at the latest effort to market long skirts. These were introduced in 1992-93 but adopted only eclectically; the style was never accepted as an exclusive canon of elegance. The directive mimesis characteristic of fashion has given way to an optional mimesis, the ultimate stage of frivolous individualism.8 On the other hand, if the despotism of dress is a thing of the past, there is a price: social norms defining what constitutes attractive and healthy bodies are increasingly powerful. The exhaustion of insistent signs of social respectability is coupled with an anxiety-producing cult of the body characterized by the desire to avoid looking old, to avoid cellulite and wrinkles, a desire manifested in the endless task of vigilance, prevention, and self-improvement. This task is undertaken by both sexes, but it is much more systematically internalized and practiced by women. Despite some major shifts, the postmodern work of appearances remains inegalitarian, a primarily feninine territory. Paradox 2. The fashion process continues to expand during a period when many seemingly incompatible phenomena are emerging. Poverty on a large scale is increasingly juxtaposed with abundance: consumers are spending less and saving more; novelties are losing their appeal to the imagination; impulse buying and status consumption are on the wane: individuals spend less and less time in stores (four hours per month in 1991 as compared to twelve hours per mnonth ten years ago. in the United States); consumer demand is oriented less toward display than toward quality, simplicity of use and care, practicality and environmental soundness; members of the upper classes want to buy more cheaply and resist the inflationary tendencies of luxury items.º At the same time. ostensibly less seductive new commercial strategies are being developed: superdiscount stores without displays and with a limited choice of items. generic products, ecological products, a decrease in spending on traditional advertising in favor of nonmedia ("below the line") communication. Nevertheless, it is absurd to speak, as some critics do. of "the end of consumer society." Whether it moves with or against the tide, the organization of the world in fashion terms goes on and on. More than ever, companies are obliged to innovate with increasing rapidity; economie competition requires advertising and the diversification of product lines. What is happening in Japan only illustrates more dramatically than elsewhere the generalization of the fashion logic: in 1991. more than two hundred new Walkman models and more than sixty new (or repackaged) beers were introduced into the Japanese market; every month Seiko proposes sixty new styles of watches, on the average: more than three hundred new nonalcoholie drinks are introduced every year.1º Europe and the United States are not exempt from this law of market segmentation, marginal diversification, and accelerated obsolescence. In 197o, cars were initially produced in four different versions as opposed to twenty in 1990; in 1980, twenty-seven hundred new mass-market consumer products were introduced into the American market as opposed to nine thousand at the end of the decade; five thousand new products show up every year in European supermarkets. The era of flamboyant advertising is no doubt declining somewhat, but this is because it is being overtaken by other mechanisms of the fashion form, diversification and personalization applied to the vectors of communication itself (direct marketing, promotion, public relations, lobbying, sponsorship, and so on). Far from being exhausted, consumer-fashion society is pursuing its inexorable rise, although with somewhat less glitter, less faith in progress, less enthusiasm for novelty. What marketing specialists now call "cocooning" or “burrowing" only points to this new phase of fashion in which consumption is less euphoric and more ecological, more inward-looking than other-directed. The fashion system is not collapsing: it is becoming trivialized as it evolves into an increasingly privatized and cynical system of self-service consumption. Paradox 3. To the extent that our needs are programmed by the specialized agencies of the consummate-fashion system, each of us becomes increasingly the agent of our own existence, the free operator of our own private life. The more the world is “bureaucratized," the more individuals are "autonomized": among other pieces of evidence for this, we may look at the rising divorce rate and the increase in nonmarital relationships, the liberalization of sexual conduct, birth control, the decline in orthodox religious beliefs and practices, and the increased number of women in the work force. Eight French women out of ten now say that they would rather work than stay home; for the same number, a woman's life cannot be considered a success without a career. To be sure, advertising can still exploit the register of the housewife or the sexy woman; to be sure, there are still major inequalities between men and women in terms of salaries, power, unemployment, and household chores. However, the society of ephemera has allowed women's desire for autonomy and self-realization to break through, especially through salaried work. On the surface, the culture of consumption casts women in a childlike and inferior role; in reality. it works toward their ongoing emancipation. Stereotypical judgments of fashion society and the culture of consumption have to be reexamined.11 Contemporary Western culture is continually denounced as a “soft" dictatorship, an enterprise of generalized domination and massification, whereas it also generates greater independence on the part of consumer-actors, more concern for self and for meaning, less obsession with social status. Far from being equivalent to totalitarianism, fashion distances us from totalitarianism; it opens up the space of existential choice through the multitude of standards and models it proposes. With generalized fashion, individual autonomy has become an important social phenomenon; it has shifted into the second phase of the historical trajectory inaugurated in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.12 Paradox 4. The more powerful the logic of fashion becomes, the more powerfully ecological demands are expressed. The paradox is manifest: the logic of fashion celebrates the present, artificiality, and novelty, while the ecological movement focuses on the future, on nature, on conservation. The former is playful while the latter is fearful. But there need not be an unbridgeable gap between ecological sensitivity and the empire of fashion; fashion plays a more subtle game. Unquestionably, the future of the planet and its safekeeping are going to be the focus of collective preoccupation from now on. But except for the advocates of “deep ecology," what drives green" consciousness in particular is the individualist concern for the quality of life and health, the desire to live better in the present. Mass ecological passion is the expression of the postmodern age of fashion. It lacks an alternative thrust; it does not aspire to “change life"; it reflects the exhaustion of the great conquering historical projects: it is now a matter only of protecting and preserving the environment in view of a betterbalanced existence. There is no radical opposition between environmentalist ecology ("shallow ecology") and the individualist logic of consumption, for the aim of the former is only to improve management in order to improve consumption. Ecological sensitivity is governed by an ecology of consumption and a specific form of hedonism, with its faddish ecological purchasing, organic products, health-food diets, gentle therapies. and green tourism. All these sectors are already giving rise to fashions. labels. specialized shops, and focused marketing. Ecoconsumption and ecobusiness represent a new stage of fashion, one in which the seduction of marketing annexes the “respect for nature" niche. There is no exit here from the global fashion system; the new is simply propelled in the name of saving the earth and preserving one's health. What is "real." lasting. the “green" antifashion, functions as the new vector of consummate fashion. Paradox 5. The more the democracies commit themselves to the race for the new, the more they are fascinated with the past, and the more interest they show in rehabilitating, conserving, and valorizing what is old. The fashion era is at the same time the era of national patrimonies and cultural anniversaries. A new museum is opened, somewhere in Europe, every single day. In France, more than one thousand cultural and historical commemorations have taken place over the last six years. The United States and Europe alike are witnessing an extraordinary memorial proliferation, a growing collective taste for the past, as illustrated in particular by the hordes of tourists who visit monuments, museums, and old cities. The field of patrimony and commemoration has become infinite: practically everything is subject to preservation, even things that are very modest or not at all remote (artifacts from the 195os and i96os); every date is an occasion to celebrate some great name or event (an artist's birth or death, a 5oth, 100th, 150th, 200th, or 500th anniversary).13 Still, let us not be misled: this commemorative bulimia is only in apparent contradiction to the fervor for the present that characterizes fashion. On the one hand, the postmodern cult of the past is evidenced through souvenir industries, media solicitations, high-decibel laser spectacles, ad agencies, and tourist bureaus. The frenzy to commemorate is coupled with economic and touristic exploitation, with marketing investment oriented toward national or local promotion, along with efforts to sell the image of cities or regions. The sacralization of the patrimony is at one and the same time a "cultural enterprise" and a tourist industry, a stratum to be exploited. Stuffy ceremonies and official homages have been supplanted by television shows, folkloric reenactments, theatrical and musical performances: the fashion process has succeeded in phagocytosing our relation to our inheritance. On the other hand. commemorative inflation merely confirms the decline of any structuring influence of the past on our behavior and the correlated increase in the power of models of the present. The postmodern commemorative bulimia does not in any way signify faithfulness to the past. or any hold of the past over what we are today; rather, it signifies a loss of the constraining collective power of the past. The past is no longer a canon to be reproduced or faithfully imitated, but merely a realm to visit and to admire aesthetically. We are all the more prepared to celebrate the past in that it no longer serves as an example for us;1⁴ the old has shifted into the order of ephemeral animation of our lives, the order of mass cultural consumption. Paradox 6. Even as our daily lives are orchestrated by the law of inconstancy. seduction. and images, ethical questions are resurfacing with a new intensity: bioethics. humanitarian acts, ecology, the morality of business and the media, debates about sexual harassment, abortion, politically correct language. antidrug and antitobacco measures. We are witnessing a vigorous return of ethical themes in the social discourse of the democracies. Even so. here too we must not forget that the comeback of ethics is not completely exempt from the influence of fashion; we have only to look at charity shows, those syntheses of ethics and diversion, of good intentions and rock stars, of generosity and decibels. “All I did," declared Bob Geldof, organizer of Band Aid, “was make famine fashionable"—in other words, he broadcast a painless, optional, emotional, and circumstantial ethics, an ethics adapted to the new individualist culture and stripped of regular, maximalist, sacrificial commandments. As for humanitarian interventions, it must be obvious by now that, however necessary they may be, they function as instruments of political communication intended to burnish the image of power in the public eye. The same logic governs, in part, the vogue for business ethics, one of whose central goals is to improve companies'performance (“ethics pays") through the management and marketing of values:1⁵ ethical codes, sponsorship, participation, institutional communication of an ethical nature. In our fashion societies, ethics has been instrumentalized; it has become a means of communication for internal and external use, a tool for managing brand names and human beings. One may have reservations about this development; it is easy to emphasize its manipulative and demoralizing effects. Nevertheless, it offers proof that the consummate age of fashion is capable of giving priority once again to ethical standards. The frivolous universe of objects and the media does not lead inexorably to cynicism and the collapse of all values. If our societies have a strong penchant for an individualism with no holds barred, they also have a penchant for indignation; thus, they demand limits to the spiraling rise in subjective rights. At the same time, they manifest concern for future generations and for others in general, as the persistence and expansion of volunteerism attests. Alongside irresponsible individualism (“every man for himself"), a responsible individualism is being reconstituted; it includes a commitment to mutual aid and a respect for moral values. Yet alongside the ethical demand for realistic, liberal, and pragmatic solutions achieved through dialogue, a moralistic, even fundamentalist spirit is also being reconstituted (the "pro-life" movement, the antipornographers, the antivivisectionists, the antismoking lobby. the opponents to liberalization of drugs). The universe of frivolity has simply broadened the ethics “wars."16 Paradox 7. In this book, I have defended the idea that consummate fashion is a factor contributing to the consolidation of the liberal democracies. Yet what is happening before our eves in Western Europe? Racist and xenophobic discourse is resurfacing in the public arena: extreme rightist parties are staking out places for themselves in the political landscape: immigrant hostels are burned in Germany and Jewish cemeteries are desecrated in France. Must our positive assessment of the ultimate reign of fashion thus be revised? One thing at least needs to be made clear. If it is manifestly-and regrettably—the case that the frivolous democracies do not prevent racism and xenophobia, at least we must note that up to now they have succeeded in confining bloody violence to small numbers of voung people who lack a legitimate and credible ideological program, and who are not supported by governing political parties, public opinion, or the press. Here is where the present situation differs from the one that prevailed between the two world wars. For the first time since the end of the eighteenth century, the democracies have no project but democracy itself; there is no longer any party whose declared goal is the destruction of democracy and the use of political violence. The new democratic citizenship undeniably tends to be passive, apathetic, and abstentionist; still, that has not stood in the way of huge street demonstrations in Germany, Austria, and Italy against the rise of racism. Major German corporations have organized advertising campaigns against xenophobia. These reactions on the part of civil society have nothing in common with those of the previous era, an era that was nevertheless subtended by an intransigent culture of civic and moral duty. The extreme right is not going to disappear anytime soon, but everything indicates that, at least in France, it has gotten all the votes it is going to get, that it will remain a marginal protest formation incapable of subverting democratic institutions. It is not the fashion system that makes liberal regimes fragile, it is rather the gaps in that system, when individuals find themselves excluded from its order, when they see their future threatened, when career choices are closed off, when poverty and underconsumption are on the rise. The age of the superficial does not protect us against all xenophobia and all racism, but it is in reality what protects us best against totalitarian temptations, civil wars, and political violence. The real danger facing us is not the return of fascism, it is the dualization of democracies. the gap between rich and poor, between exclusive neighborhoods and ghettos. between the work force and the unemployed, between well-integrated citizens and marginal figures, between high-quality education and a deteriorating school system, between hospitals on the cutting edge and a disastrous system of health insurance.17 The age of fashion has obviously not succeeded in conjuring away the social chasms within democracies; it has not stemmed the rise of poverty, underemployment, social exclusion. or delinquency. But let us not be too quick to blame all societv's ills on the fashion universe. All developed societies today confront the same challenges (worldwide competition, declining employment, marginalization of certain social groups, drug addiction), but they do not all react in the same way, they do not all enact identical policies in the realms of social welfare, education, health, industry, or urban life. Fashion is a social form independent of societies'policies, choices, and intentions. The problems of the future will obviously not be settled by fashion logic: however, nothing lasting will be accomplished without that logic, either. Let us not fool ourselves: no exit from the system of the ephemeral and of seduction is thinkable or even desirable. We have to regulate that system through the voluntary action of individuals and governments. Fashion entails neither fatality nor pure determinism: fashion has to be restructured and finalized in terms of our values. Whatever constraints may be imposed by the “system," people do have a margin of liberty and creative autonomy with regard to the future. Consummate fashion does not signify “the end of history"18 but the constantly renewed invention of democracy and the marketplace; it signifies the responsibility of citizens facing the construction of a future whose keys no individual now holds The unreasonableness of fashion calls for, and paves the way for, an extra measure of enlightened reason. Total fashion generates a host of antithetical effects. At one point, it increases the capacity of individuals to reject dogmas; at another, it supports the return of esoteric beliefs, the multiplication of sects, the unexamined life. At one point, it allows more universalist openings, more outpourings of imitation and hybridization; at another, it is accompanied by new ethnocentric fashions, by cultural separatism, by closed cults based on self-identification.1º In one place, tolerance and heterodoxy are in the forefront: in another, new ideologically “correct" codes are arising that challenge freedom of expression and teaching, that define what one has the right to say and not to say, that seek to punish any and all discriminatory verbal behavior. The demnocracies of the fashion era are for the most part undoing the old catechisms and dogmatisms, but at the same time they are reinstituting new minority modes of meaning, new mimetic contagions that function like thought police. This litany of paradoxes could go on and on. In one place, consummate fashion erodes the value of work in favor of leisure, private life. the sovereignty of money; in another, it encourages individuals to find self-realization in business and professional life. For some, it leads to self-destruction via drug addiction; for others, it entails holding the aesthetic and hygienic body sacred. In one place, corruption, illegal transactions, and fiscal fraud are on the rise; in another, the populace votes in favor of moralizing measures. Everywhere, the individualism of fashion society progresses by taking on two radically opposing facets: more self-control, more mobility. more integration for the majority; more marginalization. more delinquency, more irresponsible lawlessness for the rest. Here is the challenge of the twenty-first century. While the frivolous democracies have defeated the totalitarian regimes, they now have to win the battle for democratic progress, for the quality of life, for individual and collective responsibility. in an ongoing struggle at the very heart of our societies. 1. Gilles Lipovetsky, L’Ere du vide (Paris: Gallimard, 1983). PART ONE THE ENCHANTMENT OF APPEARANCES 1. Gabriel de Tarde. The Laws of Imitation (189o), trans. Elsie Clews Parsons (Cloucester, Mass.: Peter Smith, 1962). 2. For example in Georg Simmel, where fashion is grafted onto psychological tendencies viewed as universal and in contradiction with imitation and individual differentiation: see -Fashion" (1904), in On Individuality and Social Forms: Selected Writings. ed. Donald N. Levine (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1971), pp. 294-323. See also René König, A la Mode: On the Social Psychology of Fashion (1971), trans. F. Bradley (New York: Seabury Press, 1973). 