The Enchantment of Appearances Asíion does not belong to all ages or to all civilizations: it has an identifiable starting point in history. Instead of seeing fashion as a phenomenon consubstantial with human life and society, I view it as an exceptional process inseparable from the origin and development of the modern West. For tens of thousands of years, people lived together without a cult of fantasy and novelty, without the instability and ephemeral temporality of fashion. This does not mean that collective life lacked change, or curiosity, or a taste for exotic realities. But it was only at the end of the Middle Ages that the order of fashion itself became recognizable—fashion as a system, with its endless metamorphoses, its fits and starts, its extravagance. The renewal of forms became a social value; fantasy deployed its artifices and its excesses in high society. With the birth of fashion, inconstancy in matters of form and ornamentation was no longer the exception but the lasting rule. In order to conceptualize fashion, we shall have to stop identifying it as a principle that is necessarily and universally inscribed in the evolutionary course of all civilizations,¹ and we must also stop viewing it as a historical constant with universal anthropological roots.2 The mystery of fashion lies here. in the uniqueness of the phenomenon, in the way it sprang up and took hold in the modern West and nowhere else. Neither an elementary force of collective life nor a permanent principle of social transformation rooted in the human condition in general, fashion is essentially a sociohistorical formation limited to a single type of society. We can uncover its fascinating effects not by invoking its presumed universality, but rather by carefully determining the limits of its historical extension The history of clothing is unquestionably the privileged reference for such a problematics. The historical view of fashion imposes itself in particular when we look at the way styles have changed and at the rapid pace of change in dress. Fashion is exercised most ostentatiously, carried to extremes, in the sphere of personal appearance; for centuries, this sphere has represented the purest manifestation of the organization of the ephemeral. This privileged linking of clothing and fashion is not at all fortuitous; as we shall see, there are important reasons for the connection. Nevertheless, fashion has by no means remained confined to the domain of dress. In parallel developments, at different paces and to varying degrees, other sectors—furniture and decorative objects, language and manners, tastes and ideas, artists and cultural productions—have been won over by the fashion process, with its fads and its rapid shifts of direction. In this sense, from the moment of its inception in the West fashion has had no content of its own. Fashion is a specific form of social change, independent of any particular object; it is first and foremost a social mechanism characterized by a particularly brief time span and by more or less fanciful shifts that enable it to affect quite diverse spheres of collective life. But until the nineteenth and twentieth centuries the fashion process was most obviously embodied by clothing. Dress was the theater of the most accelerated, capricious, and spectacular formal innovations. For centuries on end, the role of personal appearance was preponderant in the history of fashion. Although personal appearance clearly does not communicate the full originality of the realm of ephemera and superficiality, it does offer the best way of getting at that realm, because it is the one that is best known. the most often described, the most fully represented and discussed. No theory or history of fashion fails to take personal appearance as its starting point and as its central object of investigation. Although as a social phenomenon fashion is subject to considerable agitation, from a broad historical viewpoint its underlving mechanisms are not without stability and regularity. On the one hand, there are the ebbs and flows that feed the chronicles of elegance. On the other hand. we find an astonishing centuries-long continuity that calls for a very long range history of fashion, an analysis of its broad patterns and of the breaks that disturbed its order. If we are to conceptualize fashion, we have to veer away from positivist history and from the classical periodization by century and decade favored by historians of dress. That history has its legitimacy: it is the obligatory starting point. an indispensable source of information for any reflection on fashion. But it gives too much credit to the idea that fashion is merely an uninterrupted and homogeneous chain of variations, marked at more or less regular intervals by innovations of greater and lesser significance. That history has acquired considerable knowledge of the past, but little understanding of fashion's originality or of its real inscription in the great span of history in its collective dimensions. We have to go beyond painstaking transeriptions of fashion's novelties and try to reconstruet the great avenues of its history, try to understand how it works, try to uncover the various forms of logie that organize it and the ties that bind it to the collective whole. We need to piece together the history of the struetures and logies of fashion, punctuated as that history is with twists and turns, with major discontinuities that initiate phases lasting a long—sometimes a very long-time. This is the problematics that governs the chapters that follow. lt is important to specify, however, that the breaks in fashion's regime do not automatically imply thoroughgoing transformation or incomparable novelty. Over and above the great discontinuities, certain standards, attitudes, and processes have been repeated and maintained: from the late Middle Ages to our day, despite decisive shifts in the system, the values and invariants that constitute fashion have continued to reproduce themselves. The crucial turning points that are insistently underlined here must not be allowed to obscure the broad currents of continuity that have been perpetuated and that have guaranteed the identity of fashion. In this trajectory spanning many centuries, an initial phase held sway for five hundred vears. From the mid-fourteenth to the mid-nineteenth centuries, the inaugural phase of fashion, the precipitous rhythm of ephemera and the reign of fantasy were established in a systematic and lasting way. Fashion revealed its characteristic social and aesthetic features even then. but for very limited groups that monopolized the power of initiative and creation. This was the artisanal and aristocratic stage of fashion. ## Fashion and the West: The Aristocratic Moment The Instability of Personal Appearance Lor most of human history, societies have gone about their business oblivious to the spirited play of frivolous change. For thousands of years. the so-called savage social formations, for instance, have remained unaware of, and implacably resistant to, the frenzy of change and the everincreasing extravagance of individual fancy. The unchallenged legitimacy of ancestral legacies and the positive value placed on social continuity have served everywhere to impose a principle of immobility. the repetition of models inherited from the past, a seamless conservatism in modes of being and appearing. In such social systems, the process and the idea of fashion are completely meaningless. "Savages," even apart from ceremonial clothing, may have a pronounced taste for ornamentation, may well seek certain aesthetic effects; still, there is nothing that resembles the fashion system. Even though they may come in endless varieties, the types of decorations, accessories, hairstyles, body painting, and tattoos remain fixed by tradition, subject to norms that do not change from one generation to the next. Primitive society is hyperconservative: it excludes the emergence of fashion because fashion goes hand in hand with a relative devaluing of the past. Fashion always implies the attribution of prestige and superiority to new models and by the same token entails a certain downgrading of the old order. Completely centered on respect for the past and the meticulous reproduction of that past, primitive society cannot permit the consecration of novelty and individual fancy, the aesthetic autonomy of fashion. In a relation of strict dependence vis-à-vis its mythic past, primitive society is organized in such a way as to limit and reject the dynamics of change and history. How could such a society succumb to the whims of novelty when human beings are not recognized as the authors of their own social universe, when customs and principles for conducting one's life, social requirements and taboos, are held to result from a moment of origin that has to be perpetuated, changeless, and immobile; when antiquity and the continuation of the past are the foundations of legitimacy? What else can people do but continue as faithfully as possible to carry out practices dating back to the time of origin as reported by mythic narratives? So long as society's most basic and most meaningful activities are dictated by the deeds and gestures of founding fathers, and so long as individuals are unable to assert a relative independence with respect to the collective norms, the logic of fashion is excluded. Primitive societies erect prohibitive barriers against the constitution of fashion, inasmuch as fashion explicitly consecrates aesthetic initiative, fancy, and human originality: even more significantly, they do so because fashion implies an order of value that exalts the present and the new, in direct opposition to the model of timeless legitimacy based on submission to a collective past. If the reign of frivolous change is to have a chance of taking hold, not only must the power of human beings to modify the organization of their world be recognized, but also. at a later stage, the partial autonomy of social agents with regard to the aesthetics of appearance. The emergence of the state and of class divisions has not altered the basic nature of the problem. Over the centuries, the same tastes, the same ways of doing, feeling, and dressing have been perpetuated unchanged. In ancient Egypt. the same type of tunic-dress, worn by both sexes, was maintained for nearly fifteen centuries with almost total consistency; in Greece. the peplos. a woman's outer garment, prevailed from the origins of Greek society to the middle of the sixth century B.c.; in Rome, the male garb of toga and tunic persisted with slight variations from the earliest period to the end of the empire. The same stability was characteristic of China. India, and other traditional Asian civilizations where modifications in dress were the exception. The Japanese kimono remained unchanged for centuries, while in China women's dress underwent no real transformation between the seventeenth and the nineteenth centuries. As nationstates emerge and conquests occur, the dynamic of historical change is undeniably at work: currents of importation and diffusion disrupt customs and dress from time to time, but this does not mean that they take on the character of fashion. Apart from some peripheral phenomena, a given change can be expected to crystallize in a new and lasting collective norm: the principle of immobility always wins out, notwithstanding openings to history. While change often results from external influences, from contact with foreign peoples from whom some particular type of clothing is copied, it may also be inspired by a sovereign to be imitated (the Greeks shaved their beards following Alexander's example and under his orders), or it may be decreed by conquerors who impose their form of dress on the conquered peoples (at least the upper classes): thus the Moghuls' dress became the rule in India after the Moghul conquest.¹ But in no case do the variations proceed from some autonomous aesthetic logic; they translate not the requirement of regular renewal characteristic of fashion, but rather circumstantial influences or relations of dominance. What is at issue is not the uninterrupted chain of small variations constitutive of fashion, but the exceptional adoption or imposition of foreign models that are instituted after the fact as stable norms. Although certain civilizations have been much less conservative than others, more open to innovations from without, more eager to display their wealth, they have never come close to what we call fashion in the strict sense—that is, the systematic reign of the ephemeral, of frequent evanescent fluctuations. In this sense, the ages of fashion cannot be defined, as Gabriel de Tarde thought they could, simply in terms of the prestige of foreign or new models—which, for Tarde, amounted to one and the same process.2 The prestige of foreign realities is not enough to upset the rigidity of tradition: the fashion system comes into play only when the taste for novelty becomes a consistent and regular principle, when it is no longer synonymous with simple curiosity about exogenous items, when it functions as an autonomous cultural requirement, relatively independent of chance relations with the outside world. Under these conditions, it is possible for a system of frivolous change to develop and maintain itself in perpetual motion as an endless interplay of innovations and reactions. a gane based on the logic of one-upmanship. Fashion in the strict sense scarcely existed before the mid-fourteenth century. This moment stands out, first and foremost because of the appearance of a radically new type of dress that was sharply differentiated according to gender: short and fitted for men, long and close to the body for women.3 This revolution in apparel laid the groundwork for modern dress. The same long flowing robe that had been worn more or less indiscriminately by both sexes was replaced, on the one hand, by a costume for men composed of a doublet, a kind of short, narrow jacket connected to tight breeches that followed the contour of the legs: and. on the other hand, by a costume for women that perpetuated the traditional long dress but that was much more closely fitted and low necked. The major innovation was the replacement of men's long, flowing, smocklike sureoat with a short garment cinched in at the waist and fastened with buttons. leaving the legs uncovered exeept for tight-fitting stockings. The transformation instituted a quite pronounced difference between male and female clothing, one that persisted throughout the entire evolution of fashion up to the twentieth century. The new costume for women was also fitted, and it exalted the attributes of femininity: the garment lengthened the body with a train, while it emphasized the bust, the hips, and the small of the back. The chest was highlighted by the lowered neckline; the stomach itself was accentuated, in the fifteenth century, by the use of small protruding bags worn under the dress, as we see in Jan Van Eyck's famous painting "The Marriage of Giovanni and Giovanna Cenami" (1434). While there is controversy over where this major transformation in dress styles first occurred, we know that the innovations spread very rapidly throughout Western Europe between 1340 and 1350. From this point on, one change followed another: variations in appearance were more frequent, more extravagant, and more arbitrary; previously unknown rhythms and ostentatiously whimsical, gratuitous, decorative forms made their appearance, defining the very process of fashion. Change was no longer an accidental, rare. fortuitous phenomenon; it became a fixed law of the pleasures of high society. Henceforth the transitory would come to function as one of the constitutive structures of modern life. Between the fourteenth and the nineteenth centuries, the fluctuations of fashion did not always proceed at the same rapid pace. As the Middle Ages waned. the rhythms of change were unquestionably less spectacular than they became during the Enlightenment era, when vogues caught on quickly and changed "every week. every day, almost every hour,"⁴ responding to whatever was "in the air," registering the events of the day the latest triumphs. Nevertheless, starting in the late fourteenth century, sudden shifts in tastes, fancies, and novelties proliferated rapidly and have had free rein in worldly circles ever since. This is not the place to attempt to list even in a cursory wav the changes in cut and detail of the various elements of dress: they have been too numerous, the rhythms of fashion have been too complex and too variable in terms of place and period. The documentation at our disposal is fragmentary and limited, but historians of costume have managed to present quite a clear picture of the historical introduction and establishment of fashion's brief cycles, starting in the late Middle Ages." The testimony of contemporaries reveals in a different way the extraordinary emergence of this accelerated temporality. In the late Middle Ages and the early modern period, a number of authors sought—perhaps for the first time in history—to preserve the memory of clothing worn during their lifetimes: there are the court chronicles of the count of Zimmern, for instance, and the chronicle of Konrad Pellikan de Ruffach, who recorded the emotions aroused by styles and extravagant appearances, the sense of passing time conveyed by variations in modes of dress. In the sixteenth century, Matthäus Schwarz, the financial director of the House of Fugger, undertook to produce a book of watercolor illustrations in which he discussed the costumes he had worn from childhood on, and those he had had made according to his own instructions. This unprecedented attention to ephemeral phenomena and to changes in forms of dress, along with the desire to record them, has given Matthäus Schwarz his reputation as the “first historian of clothing."6 Curiosity about “old" ways of dressing and a perception of the rapid variations in fashion appear again as early as $1 4 7 8 .$ when King René of Anjou issued an order initiating research into the details of clothing worn by past counts of Anjou. At the beginning of the sixteenth century, Vecellio designed a collection "of ancient and modern clothing." In sixteenth-century France, inconstancy in dress was noted by various authors, above all Montaigne, in his Essays: "We change so suddenly and promptly that the inventiveness of all the tailors in the world could never furnish us enough novelties."8 In the earlv eighteenth century, the protean character of fashion and the great mobility of taste were widely discussed and criticized in literary works, satires. and opuscules: it became a commonplace to evoke the fickleness of fashion.º It is true that the superfluities of dress and feminine coquetry in particular had been the object of numerous complaints from ancient times on. but starting in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. denunciations were aimed at male and female clothing itself, at the inconstancy of tastes in general. Fashion's fickleness was self-evident in the eves of its chroniclers: the instability and oddities of appearance became objects of questioning. astonishment, and fascination, as well as repeated targets for moral condemnation. Fashion was in constant flux, but not everything in fashion was subject to change. Ornamentation and accessories, the subtle details of trimmings and fullness, were particularly influenced by fashion's rapid modifications, while the structure and general forms of dress were much more stable. Fashion change mainly affected the most superficial elements of clothing; it generally had less impact on the overall cut. The farthingale, a bell-shaped framework that made dresses stand away from the body. appeared in Spain around 1470, and continued to be worn through the middle of the seventeenth century. The rhinegrave (petticoat breeches) remained in use for nearly a quarter of a century, the jerkin for almost seventy years. The wig was fashionable for more than a century. The socalled gown à la française remained unchanged for decades. starting in the mid-eighteenth century. Frills and furbelows, colors. ribbons and laces, details of shaping, nuances of fullness and length: such elements underwent constant renewal. The success of the Fontanges hairstyle under Louis XIV lasted some thirty years, although with variant forms. It always entailed a complex raised construction of ribbons, laces, and bows, but its architecture offered considerable variation: there was the culebutte style, the effrontée style, the palissade style, and so on. The eighteenth-century panierruches, underskirts fitted over metal hoops, were popular for more than half a century, but with varying forms and dimensions: there was the round table style; the cupola style; the gondola style, which made women look like water carriers; the oval-shaped "elbow" style; the cadet style; the "shrieking" style (criardes), named after the noise made by the gummed linen used; and there were the lightweight short petticoats called considérations. These were cascades of “little nothings," small differences that combined to make up fashion as a whole. Such differences immediately raised the standing of anyone who adopted them and lowered that of anyone who failed to adopt them, and they immediately rendered obsolete whatever had gone before. Fashion instituted the social power of infinitesimal signs the astonishing mechanism of social distinction conferred on those whose dress is subtly novel. This escalation of superficial changes cannot be separated from the global stability of dress: fashion's mutability could only have come into being against a background of order. It is because the changes remained modest and preserved the overall architecture of dress that renewals could catch on and give rise to fads. Fashion did undergo authentic innovations. to be sure, but these were much less common than the succession of small modifications in detail. The logic of these minor changes is what truly characterizes fashion; in Sapir's terms, fashion is more than anything "a variation in an understood sequence."10 The temporal effervescence of fashion must not be interpreted as an acceleration of tendencies toward change, tendencies that are developed to a greater or lesser extent in different civilizations. Rather, this effervescence must be seen as inherent in the human social phenomenon.11 What it translates is not the continuity of human nature (the taste for innovation and ornament, the desire to stand out, group rivalry, and so on) but a historical discontinuity. a major break—however circumscribed—with the form of socialization that had prevailed from time immemorial: the immutable logic of tradition. On the scale of the human adventure, the sudden appearance of fashion signaled a departure from the form of collective cohesiveness that had ensured the durability of custom; it signified the deployment of a new social bond and of a new social temporality. Gabriel de Tarde has already proposed a penetrating analysis of this process. In his view, ages of custom are ruled by the prestige of antiquity and the imitation of ancestors, while ages of fashion are dominated by the cult of novelty and the imitation of local and foreign models: people want to look more like contemporary innovators and less like their forebears. Love of change and the determining influence of contemporaries are the two major principles governing eras of fashion; both entail a devaluing of the ancestral heritage and a tendency to dignify the norms of the social present. Fashion plays such a radical role in history because it institutes an essentially modern social system, freed from the grip of the past. The old is no longer deemed venerable; "the present alone seems to inspire us with respect."12 The social space of the traditional order is rearranged in favor of a new type of interpersonal bond, one based on the changeable decrees of the present. As an exemplary figure of modern socialization, fashion has liberated an agency of collective life from the timeless authority of the past: "In periods when custom is in the ascendant, men are more infatuated about their country than about their time; for it is the past which is preeminently praised. In ages when fashion rules, men are prouder, on the contrary, of their time than of their country."13 High society was gripped by the passion for innovation; it flared up with enthusiasm for the latest finds. It imitated the reigning fashions in Italy, Spain, and France in turn; anything that was different and foreign gave rise to a snobbish preference. Fashion was the first manifestation of a passion characteristic of the West the passion for what is “modern." Novelty became a source of worldly value, a mark of social excellence. People had to keep up with whatever was new; they had to adopt the latest changes. The present took over as the temporal axis governing a superficial but prestigious sector of the life of the elites. The modernity of fashion? The question warrants a closer look. On the one hand, fashion indeed illustrates the ethos of aristocratic ostentation and expense, an ethos diametrically opposed to the modern bourgeois spirit devoted to savings, foresight, and calculation. Fashion runs counter to the spirit of growth and the development of nastery over nature. On the other hand, however, fashion belongs structurally to the evolving modern world. Its instability signifies that appearances are no longer subject to intangible ancestral laws, that they stem from human decisions and pure human desire. Before being a sign of conceited unreasonableness. fashion attests to the human capacity to change. the ability of men and women to invent new modes of appearance. Fashion is one of the faces of modern artifice, of the effort of human beings to make themselves masters of the conditions of their own existence. Along with the agitation that is characteristic of fashion there arises an order of "autonomous" phenomena. responding only to the play of human desires. whims. and wishes. No longer is some specific form of dress imposed from the outside, by virtue of ancestral practice. Everything connected with appearance is by rights at the disposal of individuals who are henceforth free to modify the fleeting signs, to make them more sophisticated: the only limitations are contemporary standards of appropriateness and taste. 'The age of efficiency and the age of the ephemeral, rational mastery of nature and the ludic follies of fashion: these are only in appearance antinomic. In fact, the two types of logic are rigorously parallel: just as people have devoted themselves, in the modern West, to intensive exploitation of the material world and to the rationalization of productive tasks, through the fleeting nature of fashion they have asserted their power of initiative over looks. In each case, human sovereignty and autonomy are affirmed, exercising their dominion over the natural world as they do over their own aesthetic decor. Proteus and Prometheus are of the same stock: although their paths are radically different, together they have inaugurated the unique adventure of Western modernity. ## The Theater of Artifice It is nevertheless true that at certain points in their history other civilizations have also witnessed the development of aestheticism and superficial refinement. We know that in imperial Rome men curled and dyed their hair. used perfume, and applied "beauty spots" to enhance their complexions and appear younger. Elegant women used makeup and perfume, and wore false braids and wigs dved blond or ebony black. During Flavius's reigu, elaborate raised hairdos appeared: hair was built up into elevated diadems made of complicated bows. Under Oriental influence, precious jewels and various ornaments, embroidery and braiding, came to compensate for the austerity of classical female garb. Should we conclude from this that fashion manifested itself precociously in ancient Rome? It is important to be clear on this point: even if certain of these demonstrations of elegance and luxury can be related to the logic of fashion, the most specific feature of fashion is manifestly lacking: the rapid flux of variations. No system of fashion exists without the conjunction of two logical systems: the system of ephemera and the system of aesthetic fantasy. This combination. which formally defines the fashion mechanism, has been produced only once in history. at the threshold of our modern societies. Elsewhere we can find sketchy movements, premonitory signs of what we call fashion, but never a full-fledged system. The various decorative frills have remained fixed within narrow limits; they cannot be compared to the excesses and repetitive follies of which the Western world has been the theater. If, as the Roman satires of the time attest, certain precious elements did succeed in adding sophistication to masculine appearance, can these elements really be compared to the uninterrupted deluge of frills and ribbons, hats and wigs that modern fashion has brought forth in rapid succession? To limit our consideration to Rome, fantasies did not modify the austerity of traditional masculine dress; these were rare, and they did not go beyond curled hair and the restrained use of makeup. We are far removed from Western fashion and its permanent profligacy of eccentricities. It is more significant still that in eras governed by tradition fantasies are structurally secondary with respect to the overall configuration of clothing. They may accompany and embellish it, but they always respect the general arrangements defined by custom. Thus despite the taste for striking hair dyes, assorted jewelry, fabrics and trimmings, Roman women's dress changed very little: the old outer tunic (stola) and the draped coat (palla) were worn without much modification. The search for aesthetic effects is extrinsic to the prevailing general stvle. It orchestrates neither new structures nor new forms of dress; it functions as a mere decorative complement, adding peripheral charm. With the fashion system, on the contrary. an unprecedented mechanism is in place. The artificial is not superimposed from without on a preconstituted whole; the artificial henceforth totally redefines forms of dress, both in their essential lines and in their details. By the same token, fashion shifts overall appearance into the order of theatricality, seduction, and enchanted spectacle. with its profusion of frills and furbelows but also and especially with its outrageous. extravagant, “ridiculous" forms. The long pointed shoes and other footwear, the prominent trouser flies in the form of penises, the low-necked dresses, the two-color costumes of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. and later the immense ruffs, the rhinegraves, the hoop skirts. the monumental baroque hairstyles, all these more or less eccentric fads profoundly restructured male and female figures to varying degrees. Under fashion's regime, aesthetic artificialism is not subordinated to a stable order: it is at the very root of the arrangement of grooming, which appears as a strictly contemporary, modern, ludic party spectacle. The features it shares with the timeless past of decorative taste must not be allowed to obscure fashion's absolutely radical nature, or the logical reversal that it institutes his torically. Until fashion came on the scene, "mannerism" was strictly subjected to a structure inherited from the collective past: with fashion, on the contrary, it has become primary in the creation of forms. Mannerism was once content to decorate; now it has full sway to invent evervthing related to appearance. Even when it was invested with fantasy, in traditional eras. personal appearance maintained a continuity with the past; it remained a sign of the primordial legitimacy of the ancestral tradition. The emergence of fashion has brought about a complete shift in the social meaning and temporal markers of dress. As a playful and gratuitous representation and a factitious sign, fashionable dress has broken all ties with the past; it draws the essence of its prestige from the ephemeral, scintillating, fascinating present. From the fourteenth to the eighteenth centuries, this sovereignty of whim and artifice ruled both sexes in virtually identical terms. Fashion's defining feature during all that time was the impetus it gave to a plethora of theatrical excesses, for men as well as women. Just when fashion was introducing an exaggerated dissimilarity in the appearance of the two sexes, it was also consigning both sexes in equal measure to the cults of novelty and preciosity. In many respects, for all that, men's fashion enjoyed a relative preponderance in terms of novelty, ornamentation, and extravagance. With the appearance of the short suit, in the mid-fourteenth century, male fashion embodied the new logic of appearance—based on fantasy and rapid change—more directly and more obviously than the female version from the start. In the seventeenth century men's clothes were still more mannered, more beribboned, more playful (witness rhinegraves) than those of women. Modifications of military equipment had an influence on men's fashions.1 but this by no means kept the fanciful fashion process from regulating signs of virility and toying with them: fashion put the combatant's attributes (golden spurs, swords adorned with roses, boots embellished with lace, and so on) onstage and complicated them even as it simulated "naturalness." Not until the “great renunciation" of the nineteenth century was the masculine mode eclipsed by the feminine From that point on. the new canons of male elegance, discretion and sobriety, the rejection of color and ornamentation, made fashion and its artifices a female prerogative. Governed by the logic of theatricality, the fashion system was inseparable from excess. disproportion, outrageousness. It was destined to be carried away. inexorably. in an escalation of extremes, exaggerations of volume and amplifications of form that braved ridicule. Nothing managed to keep elegant men and women from “piling it on," from going one step further with respect to what was acceptable, from competing in extremes of formal and luxurious ostentation. The ruche that could scarcely be seen above the top of the shirt, under the doublet, thus grew slowly into the independent ruff, exaggerated in volume and fullness. Similarly, the farthingale became wider and wider, in conformity with the hyperbolic process characteristic of fashion. However, the escalation of width was not unlimited. At one point or another the process was abruptly reversed turned around: fashion rejected the previous trend, but it remained driven by the same logic of plav, bv the same capricious movement. In fashion the least and the most, the sober and the flashy, fads and the reaction they provoke, are of the same essence, no matter what contrasting aesthetic effects they produce: what is at stake is always the realm of caprice, subtended by an unwavering passion for novelty and ostentation. The reign of fancy does not merely entail carrying things to extremes, but also shifting back, reversing direction: the vogue for simplicity and nature that came into being around i78o was no less theatrical, artificial, and ludic than were the earlier excesses of precious refinement. If it is true that modifications of the culture and spirit of an age are indeed at the root of variations in fashion, they can never suffice on their own to account for fashion's novelty, its irreducible aleatory character, its endless metamorphoses that are neither reasonable nor necessary. This is so because fashion cannot be detached from the logic of pure fantasy, from the spirit of gratuitousness and play that inevitably accompanies the promotion of secular individualism and the end of the immutable preregulated universe of traditional forms of appearance. This is why fashion gave rise to endless criticism, why it clashed, often head-on, with contemporary aesthetic, moral, and religious standards. Critics were no longer content to denounce human vanity, the display of wealth, and female coquetry; they came to look at forms of dress themselves as indecent, scandalous, and ridiculous. In the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, bishops and preachers issued violent condemnations of the déshonnesteté—the imnpropriety—of breeches worn with tails. "nudity of the throat," and long, pointed shoes. The tight doublet, with a camber that makes a man's chest “comparable to a woman's bust" and makes him “resemble a greyhound," created as much scandal as did hairstvles in the shape of horns. In the sixteenth century, farthingales were mocked. and their diabolical artificiality was denounced; in the seventeenth century. rhinegraves (which resembled skirts) and jerkins were objects of ridicule. In the eighteenth century, people laughed at frock coats: the allegorical and extravagant hairdos that put the wearers' eyes "in the middle of the body," women's clothing inspired by men's, and the transparent tulle dresses of the Directoire were targets for caricature artists. Without question, we can trace the tradition of denigrating frivolity. artifice. and makeup back to ancient Greece and Rome;1 decorative excesses are condemned in periods governed by this tradition. but the prevailing overall standard of dress is exempt from sarcasm. With the emergence of fashion. on the contrary, specific components of dress are themselves targets of indignation. For the first time, personal appearance is no longer determined by social consensus; it affronts habits and prejudices: it is violently condemned by church leaders; it is judged ridiculous, inappropriate. and hideous by contemporary chroniclers. The latest vogue is viewed as sublime by the elegant set, as scandalous by the moralists, and as ridiculous by the ordinary honest person; fashion and discordant opinion henceforth go hand in hand. The apotheosis of aesthetie gratuitousness has not failed to influence the secular relations, tastes, and mental outlook of human beings; it has helped forge certain characteristie features of modern individuality. By creating an order made up simultaneously of excesses and minimal discrepancies, fashion has helped refine taste and sharpen aesthetic sensibility. It has civilized the human eye by teaching it to discriminate among small differences, to take pleasure in small. subtle, delicate details, to welcome new forms. Norbert Elias has pointed out how the competitive universe of the court had given rise to the art of observing and interpreting one's peers, the art of studying people's behavior and motives;16 we may add that fashion has worked in a similar way, via appearance and taste. With fashion, human beings begin observing each other endlessly, appreciating each other's looks, evaluating nuances of cut, color, and pattern in dress. As an apparatus for generating aesthetic and social judgment, fashion has favored the critical gaze of the worldly-wise; it has stimulated more or less agreeable judgments of the elegance of others. Whatever the scope of the mimetic trends that subtend it, fashion has served as an agent for the autonomizing of taste. Yet fashion has not been merely a stage for the appreciation of the spectacle provided by others: it has also unleashed an investment of self, an unprecedented aesthetic self-observation. Fashion goes hand in glove with the pleasure of seeing. but also with the pleasure of being seen, of exhibiting oneself to the gaze of others. While fashion quite obviously does not create narcissism out of whole cloth, it does reproduce narcissism in a particularly noteworthy way: it makes narcissism a constitutive and permanent structure of fashionable individuals, by encouraging them to pay more attention to the way they present and represent themselves, by inciting them to seek elegance. grace, and originality. The endless variations of fashion and the code of elegance invite individuals to study themselves, to adapt novelties for their own use, to concern themselves with their own dress. Fashion has not only made it possible to display one's membership in a given rank, class. or nation, it has also been a vector of narcissistic individualization. an instrument for enlarging the aesthetic cult of the self even at the heart of an aristocratic age. The first major mechanism for the consistent social production of personality on display, fashion has aestheticized and individualized human vanity; it has succeeded in turning the superficial into an instrument of salvation, a goal of existence. ## Fashion: Hierarchical Expression, ## Individual Expression Fashion is an original system for social regulation and social pressure. Its changes are constraining by nature: they carry with them the obligation that they be adopted and assimilated; they impose themselves with varying degrees of rigor on a specific social milieu. Such is the “despotism" of fashion, so frequently denounced over the centuries. It is a very special form of despotism, since it has no significant sanctions except perhaps for the laughter, scorn, or criticism of one's contemporaries. But however effective these means of ensuring social conformity may have been, especially in periods ruled by hierarchy and honor, they do not suffice to account for fashion epidemics. More fundamentally, it is by virtue of the human desire to resemble people deemed superior, people whose influence radiates via prestige and rank, that fashion's decrees succeed in spreading: the diffusion of fashion has mimesis at its core. In aristocratic periods and until recently, as Tarde observed, this mimesis was propagated essentially from the top down, from superior to inferior. Waves of imitation progressed accordingly: while the court kept its eyes on the king and the great lords, the city followed the example of the models prevailing at court and among the nobility. The diffusion of fashion has been less a form of social constraint than an instrument of social representation and affirmation, less a type of collective control than a sign of social pretension. The social expansion of fashion did not win over the lower classes right away. For centuries, dress respected the hierarchy of conditions. by and large. Members of each estate wore clothing appropriate to that estate: the force of tradition prevented the confusion of status and the usurpation of privileges of dress. Sumptuary laws forbade commoners to dress like nobles; they could not display the same fabrics, accessories. or jewelry. Thus for a long time fashionable clothing remained a luxurious and prestigious acquisition confined largely to the nobility. Even so. as early as the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, as commerce and banking developed, immense bourgeois fortunes were being constituted, setting the stage for the appearance of the grand upstart with a flashy retinue, dressed like a noble. draped in jewels and expensive fabrics, rivaling the born-and-bred nobility in elegance—even as sumptuary laws were proliferating in Italy. France, and Spain; they were designed to protect national industries and prevent the waste of rare metals and precious stones. but they were also intended to impose distinctions in dress that would remind all people of their estate and place in the hierarchical order. Confusion in dress. quite limited at the outset, did not increase until the transition from the sixteenth century to the seventeenth, when the imitation of noble dress spread into new social strata. Fashion penetrated into the middle and sometimes the lower bourgeoisie; many lawyers and owners of small businesses were already adopting the fabrics, headdresses, laces, and embroideries worn by nobles. The process continued into the eighteenth century, although it still excluded rural populations. The phenomenon was strictly limited to well-to-do city dwellers: artisans and merchants, for example sported powder and wigs in the aristocratic manner. Even if bourgeois dress was never a match for aristocratic flashiness, boldness, and panache, even if it only began to spread after the fact, when the custom was beginning to disappear from the court, a slow and limited tendency to democratize fashion, to mix up dress styles, appeared even despite the sumptuary laws that were still formally in place. For centuries, numerous highly detailed statutes forbade commoners to copy the fabrics, accessories, or even the patterns of noble dress. We know that despite the threats and fines these regulations entailed, they were never effective and were very often transgressed. The fate of the sumptuary laws is a perfect illustration of the way the Old Regime worked, as Tocqueville summed it up: strict rules, lax practices. The nobility never consented to stop spending money for prestige, and it never failed to find new ways to get around the laws so as to display its wealth. As for the well-to-do bourgeoisie, alert for visible signs of social respectability and advancement, over the centuries it repeatedly violated the rules by adopting one element of aristocratic dress or another. Confusion in dress and the aims of the absolutist monarchy worked in such a way that in the 162os, roughly speaking under Richelieu's ministry, the sumptuary laws ceased to be explicitly segregative. Excessive spending on dress was still forbidden, but the prohibitions were addressed from that point on to all subjects; they no longer mentioned estate or condition.1 Thus in this sense the Convention's 1793 decree declaring the democratic principle of freedom in dress only legalized and burnished a reality that had already been in place for two centuries or more in the upper and middle strata of society. While the role of fashion in this partial process of equalizing appearances must not be overestimated, its contribution is nevertheless undeniable. By continuously introducing novelties, by legitimizing the practice of taking contemporaries instead of predecessors as models, fashion permit ted the immutable order of traditional dress and intangible distinctions among groups to dissolve. It provided a climate favorable to acts of boldness and transgression not only for the nobility but also among the bourgeoisie. Fashion must be conceptualized as an instrument for the equality of conditions. It disrupted the principle of inequality in dress; it undermined traditionalist behaviors and values in favor of the thirst for novelty and the implicit right to “fine looks” and frivolities. But fashion could be an agent of the democratic revolution only because it was accompanied more fundamentally. by a dual process with dramatic consequences for the history of our societies: the economic ascension of the bourgeoisie on the one hand, the growth of the modern state on the other. Together these factors succeeded in giving reality and legitimacy to the desire for social advancement on the part of the classes obliged to work. This is the crux of fashion's originality and also its ambiguity: an instrument of social discrimination and a manifest mark of social superiority, fashion was nevertheless also a special agent of the democratic revolution. On the one hand, it blurred the established distinctions and made it possible to confront and confuse social strata. On the other hand, it reintroduced—although in a new way—the timeless logic of signs of power, brilliant symbols of domination and social difference. Here is the paradox of fashion: its flashy displays of the emblems of hierarchy played a role in the movement toward the equalization of appearances. The spread of fashion coincided only partially with mechanical imitation. At a deeper level, it has to be identified with a selective and controlled mimesis. Even if the middle classes did take the nobility as models, they did not imitate everything; not all fleeting innovations were adopted, even at court. In sophisticated circles, not all the eccentricities of the nobility were accepted, and the more fanciful features of personal appearance provoked more disapproval than adiiration among the bourgeoisie. In the early seventeenth century, a fashion system parallel to the system prevailing at court was already in place, the moderate fashion of the honnête homme, stripped of aristocratic excess and conforming to the bourgeois values of prudence, temperance, usefulness, cleanliness, and comfort. This “wiser" fashion,18 rejecting the extravagances found at court, resulted from the filtering action of the bourgeois criteria; from court it retained only what did not run counter to its standards of good sense. moderation. and reason. Mimesis in fashion has the peculiarity of functioning at different levels: from the strictest conformity to a more or less faithful adaptation, from blind acceptance to thoughtful accommodation. Fashion is differentiated in terms of class and estate, but viewing it exclusively in these terms leaves out an essential dimension of the phenomenon: the play of freedom inherent in fashion, possibilities of nuance and gradation, opportunities to adapt or reject innovations. As an institution. fashion registers the rigid barriers of class stratification and class ideals within its own order; at the same time it is an institution in which individuals can exercise their freedom and their critical faculties. Notwithstanding the gulf between court and city, we cannot simply contrast an aristocratic fashion where individualism prevailed with a bourgeois fashion characterized by submission to custom and the community. Court fashion was obviously somewhat acquainted with conformity, and city fashion was quick to manifest significant features of the aesthetic emancipation of the individual. The most remarkable aspect of fashion lies in its relatively supple structure, one that leaves room for effects of gradation, for complex blends of refusal and acceptance. It is fashion as a system that is inseparable from individualism, from a relative latitude that allows people to reject, modulate, or accept the novelties of the day, from the principle that leaves people free to adhere to the canons of the moment or not. Notwithstanding the undeniable conformity of class behaviors and class differences, personal appearance disengaged itself from the traditional uniformity and became—very imperfectly and very unevenly, varying with the period, the milieu, and the individual—a matter of private taste, choice, and personal predilection. If fashion saw waves of imitation unfold and spread from the higher to the lower orders, it nevertheless remained characterized by an entirely new, more strictly territorial mimesis: fashion in the aristocratic age was national fashion. Instead of the unity or even identity of dress that prevailed in Western Europe in the thirteenth century, each territorial statebeginning in the fourteenth century and continuing up to the nineteenth— persisted in differentiating its forms of dress through special elements that distinguished them from those of its neighbors. In its own sphere, fashion registered the rise of the fact and feeling of nationhood in Europe, starting in the late Middle Ages. In exchange, by producing national forms of dress, fashion helped reinforce the awareness of belonging to a single political and cultural community. Still. despite the national character of fashion during that period of roughly five centuries, its multiple borrowings and influences were largely a function of the prestige of nations themselves, not as a function of a specialized institution, as was the case later on with the development of haute couture. During this entire phase of the history of fashion. artisans were simply and solely the executors of their clients wishes: lacking any power of initiative and any social status, they did not succeed—apart from the eighteenth-century “fashion merchants"in imposing themselves as creative artists. The tastes of elegant men and women were liberated: the personality of the client—not that of the producerartisan—was affirmed. The principle of individuality, in the aristocratic age. did not cross this boundary. Under such conditions, fashion's course could not be determined by a body of tradespeople who lacked autonomy and genuine legitimacy: its evolution was determined, at least in part, by the political logic of the power of nations. After complex movements and cycles of influence in which Italy, the Burgundian states, and Spain played the major roles. from the mid-seventeenth century on it was French fashion that managed to establish lasting dominion and increasingly began to look like a beacon of elegance. This national individualism is echoed by what must be called aesthetic individualism. As a collective constraint, fashion actually left individuals with relative autonomy in matters of appearance; it instituted an unprecedented relation between individuals and the rule of society. Fashion's distinguishing feature was its imposition of an overall standard that nevertheless left room for the manifestation of personal taste. One must look like other people, but not exactly; one must follow trends and also signal one's own tastes.19 This mechanism combining mimesis and individualism occurs over and over at various levels, in all the spheres where fashion operates; still, it is manifested nowhere more strikingly than in personal appearance, because dress, hairstyles, and makeup are the most obvious signs of self-affirmation. If fashion governs personal appearance to such an extent, it is because fashion is a privileged way of expressing the uniqueness of individuals. As much as it was a sign of condition, class, and nation, fashion was also, from the outset, an instrument for inscribing individual difference and freedom, if only at a superficial and generally tenuous level. The logic of fashion implied wearing the shapes and styles in favor at the moment, dressing in the garments currently viewed as essential, but at the same time it supported individual initiative and taste in trimmings and little extras, in color and decorative motif. The structure of clothing was imposed, not the accessories and decorative elements; these left room for individual taste and personality. Personal choice was henceforth an inherent aspect of fashionable dressing, but it was strictly limited to colors and to certain formal details, such as the depth of the décolleté, bows and laces, decorative motifs, the width and height of ruffs, the fullness of petticoats. The strict uniformity of fashion trends and the process of individual differentiation were historically inseparable; fashion's great originality lay in the way it allied overall conformity with personal freedom in small choices and minor variations. Fashion can then be seen as the expression of the freedom of human subjects: this phenomenon has been quite well identified, even when it concerns dress styles prevailing outside court society, as numerous texts from the first half of the seventeenth century attest.“Four Frenchmen who meet on the Pont Neuf will each create his own fashion, and any Gascon who passes by will think of some way to create yet another. So this Fashion is not a fashion. for there are as many fashions as there are Gascons, and as many Gascons as there are Frenchmen."20 Paralleling this minimal yet widespread aesthetic freedom, individualism in fashion asserted itself more insistently and systematically in the sphere of power and at court. From the late Middle Ages on. fashion depended on the changing tastes of monarchs and great lords. Clothing no longer belonged to collective memory; it becane the singular reflection of the predilections of sovereigns and other powerful people. Mimesis in fashion cannot be grasped apart from the historically unprecedented creative individualism of those at the top of the hierarchy: the power of highly placed people in this world to introduce an arbitrary break in the continuity of custom, to bring about changes in forms. dimensions, colors. The "device” used by King René in 1447-49 consisted in three colors. black. white, and grey; two years later, white and violet were used, and at the end of his reign his pages sported black and crimson, possibly echoing his political difficulties and the death of family members.21 Dress changed according to the preferences of the powerful: clothes became signs and languages by the same token as all the embroidered devices, monograms, and emblems that were used in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries as personal symbols adopted by knights. Later. Queen Jeanne of Portugal introduced the rerdugo (a support structure anticipating the farthingale) to conceal her pregnancy; Louis Xlll inaugurated the vogue of pointed beards; Louis XIV used male fashion to create a particular image of his power. Fashion, unlike tradition, requires free individual intervention, a singular and capricious power to disrupt the order of appearances. In addition to sovereigns, over the centuries we find increasing numbers of individuals known as "arbiters and ministers of elegance," great lords capable of launching fashions to which their own names are sometimes attached: Pompignan-style shoes, spurs in the Guise manner, a Sévigné coiffure. Individualism in fashion is reflected in all its brilliance in the power of a few great nobles to promote innovations deliberately, to be leaders in taste and grace within high society. Individualism in fashion also became apparent. though not in the same way, in the ostentatious search for individual differences and originality on the part of courtiers, the lesser nobility. worldly types on display in attention-seeking outfits at court and later in the salons. Muguets, petits-maîtres, muscadins, merveilleuses, beaux, fashionables were incarnations of frivolous individual ism who devoted themselves to the frenetic cult of personal and social distinction. Aesthetic excess and fanciful gratuitousness became components of fashion. possibilities open to the individual who was liberated from the traditional order of dress. Mimesis in fashion does not conflict with individualism. Rather, it embraces it, in two principal forms that are clearly opposed but that allow for subtle intermediate and composite degrees: on the one hand, the self-effacing individualism of the greatest number: on the other hand. the self-advertising individualism of worldly extravagance. It would be inaccurate to claim that ancient societies were unfamiliar with individual efforts to achieve aesthetic effects, or with manifestations, in the realm of dress. of the desire to be seductive. In Greece, a large number of adjustments and drapings could be achieved from the single piece of rectangular cloth that was the basis for the classic draped costume for both sexes. Multiple arrangements were possible, and choices unquestionably arose out of personal taste and aesthetic talent; but this personal dimension can never be confused with the individualist logic that is constitutive of fashion. So long as the traditional costume prevailed, personal appearance turned out in law and fact to be subordinated to the ancestral common rule; nowhere were social agents able to transgress prevailing practices openly and invent new lines and styles one after another. Even when ways of arranging dress varied considerably, as they did in Greece, thev were nevertheless ordered, predetermined by a closed set of possible combinations. An individual might vary and combine figures, but only within the bounds of an intangible repertory fixed by tradition: there were plays of combination and permutation, but there was no formal innovation. The emergence of fashion coincides, on the contrary, with the overthrow of this mechanism, with the advent of the principle of individual aesthetic autonomy in its two major manifestations: sovereign creation for some, adaptation of prevailing standards to individual tastes for the rest. The collective standard no doubt continued to rule with an iron hand, as attested by mimetic trends and complaints about the despotism of fashion. But in the guise of the return of the same, a radical modification occurred: individuals won the right—not an unlimited right, to be sure, but a functional one—to display personal taste, to innovate, to outdo others in daring and originality. The individualization of appearance earned secular legitimacy; the aesthetic search for difference became a constitutive logic of the universe of appearances. Far from being wholly subordinated to an overall standard, the individual agent conquered a measure of creative, reformist, or adaptive initiative: the primacy of the immutable law of the group yielded to the valorization of change and individual originality. Historicallv, this is what counts: individualism in fashion is the possibility granted to an individual—even if that individual has to come from the highest ranks of society—to be a force for initiative and change. to transform the existing order, to take personal credit for innovations. or. more modestly, to introduce elements of detail that conform to the individual's own taste. Although individuals generally go on faithfully obeying the collective dress code, their subjection in principle is a thing of the past. Where it had once been necessary to submerge one's identity and bow to the law of the group, it is now possible to highlight some distinctive characteristic or personal idiosyncrasy. Where it was once necessary to return to the past, change and personal creative taste have now been legitinized. This transformnation may not have had very profound effects on the behavior of the masses, but the break with the traditional system and the subjugation of the individual agent that it implies were nevertheless accomplished. A closed, anonymous, static system gave way to a system that in theory has no determinable limits, a system open to the personalization of appearance and intentional change of forms. Individual initiative in ornamentation, creation of new signs in the realm of dress, triumph of the fashion arbiters: far from being antithetical to the affirmation of the individual personality. as some are overly fond of repeating, fashion is based historically on the value and claims of individuality, on the legitimacy of personal uniqueness. At the very heart of a world ruled by hierarchical values, the figure of the intraworldly individual that characterizes modern societies was erected in a position of dominance. An individualism of taste developed alongside economic and religious individualism, preceding the ideological individualism of the egalitarian age. Personal autonomy in the practice of elegance preceded the valorization of the individual that characterizes modern ideology; freedom in action, however limited, came ahead of the Declaration of the Rights of Man. Very early on in the era of fashion, we can mark the advent of secular individualism in every sense of that term, an individualism alert for signs of personal uniqueness as wel as social superiority. Throughout this entire period, it must be acknowledged that individualism in fashion took the form of aristocratic individualism, a complex but exemplary case that allowed the “holistic" principle of social cohesiveness to coexist with the modern principle of individual freedom. It is thus incorrect to claim that fashion corresponded to the new "tyrannical" hold of the collective that is denounced on all sides: it is much more accurate to say that fashion reflected the emergence of human autonomy in the world of appearances. It was an inaugural sign of the emancipation of aesthetic individuality, the beginning of the right of personalization, although this right was obviously subject to the changing decrees of the collective whole. At its own level, fashion marks a break in the timeless preponderance of holistic or ganization as well as a limit to the process of social and political domination in modern societies. The growth of states and adininistrations and the perfecting of bodily programming together constitute a single facet of the evolution of the modern world. Alongside disciplinary training and the increased penetration of the political sphere in civil society, the private sphere gradually broke free of collective prescriptions. Fashion was beginning to express. in luxury and ambiguity, an invention characteristic of the West: the free. detached, creative individual and its corollary, the frivolous ecstasy of the self. ## Beyond Class Rivalries Crude though it may be in its formulation, the question of fashion's origin remains a stumbling block. Why did fashion appear and flourish in Western Europe and nowhere else? How can we account for the incessant ebb and flow of forms and tastes that has marked Western societies for six centuries? What is remarkable is how little elaboration and theoretical interrogation this question has provoked. There is no getting around it: on the origins and mainsprings of fashion, we are astonishingly ill informed. The models that are generally invoked were developed in the nineteenth centurv: since then, the basic theory of fashion has advanced very little. It has been content, in the main, to rework and refine unchanging principles established by sociological thought as quasi-dogmatic truths. The state of the question has been treated to a good deal of overblown rhetoric but no real renewal; the sociological paradigm of class distinction has come to look more and more like the indispensable key to the phenomenon. The pages that follow do not share that assurance. They begin with the idea that the sociological models proposed are far from adequate to their explanatory ambition. The project has to be thoroughly reexamined; the limits of the paradigm of distinction have to be demonstrated. We have to complicate the analytical schemas by giving due credit to phenomena generally considered secondary. We have to undertake an overall reinterpretation of fashion, and in the process we shall have to reconsider the historical role of classes and their rivalries. It is clearly impossible to understand the appearance of fashion without linking it to a set of general conditions characteristic of Western Europe after the year iooo. The economic and social conditions of the time must be taken into account, to be sure, but also, at a more subterranean level, the crucial phenomenon constituted by the end of the period of outside invasions. With the end of barbarian devastation and pillaging, the West came to know an immunity that was found virtually nowhere else in the world. The consequences of this phenomenon were considerable, not only for later economic development but also and especially for the flourishing of civilization as a whole, in a process that was not to be disrupted again by powers foreign to its cultural soil: intra-European wars were numerous and deadly, but they all took place within the family, in a closed receptacle, to use Marc Bloch's terms. This particular feature of the West. that it was to remain exempt from outside incursions, allowed its civilization to give itself over to the pleasures of sophisticated forms and ephemeral follies. The inordinate play of frivolity was made possible only by virtue of the profound cultural stability that guaranteed a permanent anchor point for collective identity: at the root of the principle of inconstancy is the constancy of Western cultural identity, an exceptional case in history. The economic factors that characterized medieval Europe also played an important role. Starting in the eleventh century, we witness the beginning of continuous economic growth based on vast land clearings and an agricultural and technological revolution, as well as the development of commerce, a monetary renaissance, and the expansion of cities. The progress of material civilization, the establishment of the feudal system. and the decline of monarchic power resulted in an increase in the revenues of the nobility and an improvement in the aristocratic standard of living With increased resources, rich and ostentatious princely courts came into being, courts that served as fertile ground for fashion and its displays of wealth. To this we must add the development of cities, the establishment of trade fairs and distant trading outposts, and the intensification of commercial exchanges that allowed new foyers of great financial fortunes to appear. In the thirteenth century, as expansion was more and more focused on cities, and the cities of Italy were at the center of the world econ omy, an upper bourgeoisie was beginning to copy the manners and tastes of the nobility. It was against this background of economie upsurge in the West, the enriching of the lordly and bourgeois classes, that fashion gained its foothold. It would be inaccurate, however, to view the birth of fashion as a direct result of economic expansion. It was in fact at the very moment when the West was experiencing the return of famines and economic hardship, wars and armed marauders, decreased agricultural revenues, epidemics and the plague, that fashion came into its own. The upsurge of ephemneral passions coincided with the end of medieval growth, in a century when the great rural landowners were weakened economically by the peasantry's abandonment of the land and agricultural work. The flourishing of fashion went hand in hand with the financial difficulties, indeed the ruin, of a segment of the nobility. This ruin cannot be attributed to the decline in land use alone: fidelity to an ethos of sumptuary expense was also a contributing factor. It is true that the crisis of the fourteenth century did not affect all regions and all sectors of the economy in the same way. It did not prevent certain aristocratic landholders from maintaining their power or indeed from developing great rural exploitations in the fifteenth century. It did not keep bankers, businessmen, and merchants from pursuing trade in silver. spices. cloth. and wheat, or from buying fiefdoms complete with rights of banishment and royalties. Even if the mercantile activity of the late Middle Ages came up against hard times and declined in importance in comparison to the era of the Crusades, it allowed the cities of Italy and Hanseatic Germany to continue to develop, and it permitted the spectacular rise of prosperous new centers in Castille, southern Germany, Lombardy, and England. The misfortunes of the late Middle Ages did not have the same consequences for everyone everywhere: despite the general slump. some great fortunes were concentrated, and newly wealthy bourgeois families proliferated. Luxurious tastes and ruinous prestige-oriented expenses, especially in the realm of dress, did not decline; on the contrary, they spread within a bourgeoisie eager to display the signs of its new power. as well as within a lordly class concerned with maintaining its status. In this sense, the appearance of fashion reflects less a major economic change than the continuation, even the exacerbation, of an aristocratic habit of magnificence that the economic crisis did not by any means manage to dislodge. The development of fashion was influenced not only by economic fluctuations but also—although quite differently—by other aspects of material civilization: the breadth of international exchanges, the urban renaissance, the new dynamism of the craft industries. In the Middle Ages, the textile industries and the far-flung commercial traffic fostered diversification in the materials used to make clothing: silk from the Far East, valuable furs from Russia and Scandinavia, cotton from Turkey, Syria, and Egypt, leather from Morocco, feathers from Africa, dyes (kermes, lacquer, indigo) from Asia Minor. Weavers and dyers were able to create luxury fabrics that circulated throughout Europe—the Europe of the powerful— by way of fairs and the sea trade: broadcloth from Flanders and England linen from southern Germany, flaxen goods from the Saône and Bresse regions of France, velvet from Milan, Venice, and Genoa. The growth of medieval cities was especially influential in allowing the establishment of a high degree of intensive specialization and division of labor. By the middle of the thirteenth century, many trade corporations had developed a complex organization and collective regulations charged with controlling product quality as well as professional training. Etienne Boileau's Livre des métiers indicates that between 1260 and 1270 there were already some ten professions in Paris devoted to clothing and personal adornment: tailors, dressmakers, shoemakers, doubletmakers, bonnetmakers, and so on. The corporation of seamstresses was not constituted and authorized to make women's clothing—-except for whalebone lining and trains—until 1675; before then, only tailors had the privilege of clothing both sexes. With their monopolies and rules fixed by tradition and codified by the corporations, the trades played a major role in the production of fashion through the mid-nineteenth century. On the one hand, the extreme specialization of trades and their corporate framework impeded their development, by stifling individual initiative and imagination. On the other hand, these same conditions allowed for numerous innovations in weaving, dyeing, and finishing, and the production they fostered was of very high quality. Fashion could come into its own. with its sophisticated production, its refined details, only on the basis of such a separation of tasks. To limit ourselves for a moment to the short masculine garb that ushered in the age of fashion, we may well wonder how it could have appeared without a body of trades that was already highly specialized. Unlike the medieval smock, which was a long, full garment pulled on over the head, the new masculine garment was very narrow at the waist and broader at the chest. Such a transformation in dress styles required a very careful cut. as well as innovative manufacturing techniques for buttons, laces. and so on. Even if tailors and other clothing professionals lacked social recognition and remained in the shadow of their prestigious clients, through their expertise and their countless anonymous innovations they contributed in a crucial way to the uninterrupted evolution of fashion. Thanks to the process of specialization, these professionals succeeded in giving concrete form to the aristocratic ideal of refinement and grace. No theory of fashion can be based solely on economic and material factors. However important these factors may be. they shed insufficient light on the endless fanciful variations and transformations that define fashion per se. 'That is why we can only conclude that fashion is anchored more firmly in social logic than in an economie dynamic. The analysis is as classical as they come: fashion's instability is rooted in the social transformations that began to occur in the late Middle Ages and spread during the Old Regime. At the heart of the process, we find the growth in economic power on the part of the bourgeoisie, a growth that facilitated both the bourgeoisie's increased desire for social recognition and its increased tendency to imitate the nobility. The quest for symbols of distinction and class competition are the essential factors in the paradigm that has presided over accounts of fashion for more than a century. According to a model that is customarily traced back to Herbert Spencer and that has been used over and over ad infinitum since then, in their search for social respectability the lower classes imitate the life-style and appearance of the upper classes. The upper classes, in turn, in order to maintain social distance and set themselves apart, are forced to innovate, to modify their appearance, once they have been overtaken by their rivals. As the bourgeois strata manage by virtue of their prosperity and daring to adopt certain marks of prestige that prevail among the nobility, change is required in order to reinscribe the social gap. This dual movement of imitation and distinction accounts for fashion's mutability.22 True. with the rise of the bourgeoisie, Europe unquestionably witnessed an increase in the desire for social advancement and an acceleration of imitative contagion: nowhere else were class barriers, estates, and conditions so widely crossed. Yet however accurate this account may be, the social dynamic of class competition still cannot explain fashion, cannot account for its extravagances and its accelerated rhythms. It is unlikely that change in fashion comes about only because a phenomenon of diffusion and widespread imitation discredits elitist signs. The very rapidity with which variations emerge contradicts this thesis: most often, novelties are replaced much faster than thev are popularized. They do not wait to be overtaken." as it were: they anticipate that process. It is not a matter of an effect undergone but an effect desired, a largely autonomous power of formal innovation. Change in fashion cannot be deduced from the widespread nature of its diffusion. It is not the inevitable effect of an external social determinism: no mechanistic rationality of that sort is equipped to grasp fashion's capriciousness. This certainly does not mean that there is no social logic of fashion. but that in fashion the controlling, determining factor is the headlong quest for novelty as such: not the cumbersome, deterministic mechanics of class conflict, but “modern" exaltation, the endless excitement of gratuitous aesthetic play. Fashion's turbulence depends less on threats to social barriers than on the continuous, inexorable, but unpredictable work carried out by the ideal of, and taste for, novelty that characterize societies in the process of extricating themselves from the prestige of the past. The weakness of the classical approach is that it sees in fashion's fluctuations only a constraint imposed from without, an obligation resulting from the tensions that symbolize the prevailing social stratification, whereas in fact these tensions correspond to the deployment of new sociohistorical goals and aspirations. A different version of the class-distinction model is currently in vogue among theoreticians of fashion. This version no longer emphasizes the headlong race between those at the bottom and those at the top of the hierarchy, the phenomenon of “catching up," but struggles for prestige at the heart of the dominant classes themselves. The development of the merchant and financier class set off a major process of social advancement. Newly wealthy members of the bourgeoisie acquired titles, bought fiefdoms and offices, and married their children into the nobility. From the fourteenth to the eighteenth centuries in Europe, royal power lent its support to a form of social osmosis within the dominant classes. The nobility was opened up to newly wealthy commoners; little bv little a noblesse de robe took its place alongside the noblesse d’épée. It was precisely when the social stratification at the top of the hierarchy was no longer rigorously stable and when waves of commoners were climbing up the social ladder that fashion began to offer its volte-faces, subtended bv strategies of distinction and class rivalries. As fortunes and ambitions became more mobile, as social barriers became less insurmountable. as privileges of birth found themselves rivaled by the power of wealth, accelerated processes of differentiation began to operate, inaugurating an age of endless competition for prestige and distinctive titles. Within the upper classes in particular, among factions within the dominant groups, between the nobility and the upper bourgeoisie, between the noblesse de robe and the noblesse d'’épée, we can locate the competitive struggles that gave rise to the dynamic of fashion.23 Obviously, I do not mean to deny the internal struggles and the strategies of distinction that accompanied the upward movement and ennobling of the bourgeoisie. What I contest is rather the notion that these struggles and strategies were at the root of fashion and its vicissitudes. From the end of the Middle Ages on, we may ask, who were the tastemakers. the trendsetters and masters of fashion? Who gave impetus. and lent their own names, to novelties, if not the most highly placed individuals, the most prominent people at court, the royal favorites. the great lords and ladies. the king or queen in person? Competitive class struggles could not have played the role attributed to them, since the instigators of change were at the top levels of the hierarchy, people who. precisely by virtue of their prominent position, were immune to class anxieties and competition for social status. Once this is understood, the effort to locate the driving force behind fashion cannot fail to take into consideration the transformations that affected the attitudes and ambitions of the social elite. What has to be understood is how the uppermost layer of the hierarchy came to transform the realm of appearances as it did, how it managed to destroy the immutable order of tradition and give itself over to the interminable spiral of fantasy: it is a question of new reference points, new goals, not of social dialectics and struggle for status. If fashion also served as an instrument of class affiliation and class distinction, this function by itself does not explain the origin of the chain of innovations and the break with the timeless valorizations of the past. Strategies of social distinction undoubtedly enhanced fashion's diffusion and expansion; but the need for distinction alone does not account for the motive force behind novelties, the cult of the social present, or the legitimation of the unprecedented. It is impossible to accept the idea that competitive struggles for prestige among groups, struggles as old as the earliest human societies themselves, are at the root of an absolutely modern process that has no historical precedent. Furthermore. we must ask how such a schema would allow us to account for the unbridled quest for originality, or the nuanced quest for small individual variations in detail. What is the origin of the process of tenuous individualization of appearance that characterizes fashion? Theories of distinction elucidate neither the driving force behind perpetual innovation nor the freedom of choice concerning personal appearance. Moreover. fashion is hardly foreign to phenomena of social competition. Veblen's celebrated analyses have taught us that upper-class consumption basically follows the principle of conspicuous waste, with the aim of attracting the admiration and envy of others. The motive underlying consumption is rivalry between individuals generated by self-love; in order to compare favorably with others, to earn and retain honor and prestige, members of the upper classes have to give and spend generously. They have to display their wealth and their luxuries; they have to demonstrate conspicuously. by their good manners, their decorum, and their surroundings, that they are not compelled to perform degrading, productive work. Fashion, with its rapid variations and its “useless" innovations, turns out to be particularly well suited for the intensification of ostentatious expense: for Veblen. it becomes a simple “corollary"24 of the law of conspicuous consumption, an instrument for achieving social respectability Veblen, who notes in passing that “no explanation at all satisfactory has hitherto been offered of the phenomenon of changing fashions,"25 thought that such an explanation could be supplied only by the theory of visible waste. That theory alone makes it possible to explain the rejection of practical usefulness that characterizes fashion; that theory alone—still according to Veblen—underlies the vicissitudes and the obsolescence of forms. The requirement of magnificence leads to an escalation of fleeting innovations, a piling-on of superfluities without any functional goal, so that “the resulting conspicuous expensiveness of dress is therefore intrinsically ugly."2o The law of unproductive expense has as its consequence both the speed of change and the ugliness of clothing that appeals to the tastes of the dav. If fashions are this fleeting, it is because they are so grotesque and unaesthetic that we can tolerate them only briefly; hence the need to find relief from the preposterous effect of these forms in new costumes that are just as faithful to conspicuous consumption but that are also opposed to good taste: fashion and the artistic are opposites. Sociological reductionism is at its peak here: trends translate only our aspiration for social standing: we like contemporary styles only inasmuch as they allow us to categorize ourselves socially, to make ourselves stand out, to derive from them the benefit of distinction. Veblen's theory unquestionably emphasizes an important aspect of fashion: ostentatious expense as a way to signify rank, arouse admiration, and display social status. But by what mechanism does the standard of conspicuous consumption manage to give rise to the cascades of novelties that constitute fashion? And why did it fail to trigger this folly of artifice for thousands of years? On this point, Veblen's analysis is brief: for the author of The Theory of the Leisure Class, what separates ages of fashion from ages of stability essentially depends on an exacerbation of the requirement to spend that is brought about by conditions proper to large cities where the upper classes are wealthier, more mobile. and less homogeneous than they were in traditional eras.2? The law decreeing ostentatious waste and the race for social standing are thus imposed more imperiously, and they result in continually changing forms and styles. The fickle movements of fashion, in this sense, merely reflect an intensification of the rule of conspicuous consumption. But was this less true in other times? Did this rule prevail with less intensity at the time of Greek or Roman ostentatious spending, when leading citizens devoted astounding fortunes to feasts, buildings, distributions of coins, sacrifices, and spectacles of all sorts?28 The standard of waste, in that context, was particularly imperious; yet fashion did not find space to flower in such a society. In fact, the imperative to display one's wealth did not intensify in the modern West; rather, it manifested itself differently. More preciselv. it allied itself structurally with the quest for individual difference and aesthetic innovation. Underlying the upsurge of fashion we find not an increase in waste for display purposes but new requirements. new values that are translated, to be sure, into the timeless code of ostentatious prodigality but that cannot be deduced mechanistically from that code. Here we have reached the limit of a sociology for which fashion functions solely as an instrument of social classification with no aesthetic aim. "When seen in the perspective of half-a-dozen years or more, the best of our fashions strike us as grotesque, if not unsightly." Veblen wrote.2º This statement is clearly unacceptable: we may not agree at any price to wear styles that were in vogue a few years before, but there are innumerable earlier fashions that we continue to admire. Yesterday's fashion is boring: those of the day before yesterday and those of the distant past continue te hold charm: we admire their refinement, their abundant details, their outdated but delicate forms. Here is proof that fashion is inseparably linked to the aesthetic requirement, that it cannot be reduced to the order of aberrant superfluity for social quotation alone. Far from being “intrinsically ugly, fashion is defined, on the contrary, by the aspiration to refinement, elegance, beauty, no matter what extravagances, excesses, and lapses in taste have managed from time to time, over the centuries, to gain sway. It is nevertheless true that fashion cannot be separated from conspicuous consumption—so long as its precise scope is spelled out, along with its social and historical anchor points. In eras of inequality, conspicuous consumption has to be understood as a social norm consubstantial with the aristocratic order, as a necessary imperative for the insistent representation of social distance and social hierarchy. As Max Weber had already noted, "luxury in the sense of rejecting purposive-rational control of consumption is for the dominant feudal strata nothing superfluous: it is a means of social self-assertion."30 The aristocratic ethos of largesse coupled with disdain for work certainly was one of the conditions for the emergence of fashion: some sovereign ideal of that sort, embedded in the holistic order of societies. was a prerequisite for the gratuitousness and showy play of adornment. The splendor of court life in the princely states and later in the great absolutist monarchies was particularly dependent on that standard of magnificence. As a place where nobles sought to shine and stand out, a place of constant competition for status and prestige, a place where an obligation to spend money on symbols of social distance was imposed. the princely court was a decisive factor in the blossoming of fashion. As the great court societies evolved, moreover, fashion questions became matters of the highest importance for a nobility that had been disarmed, dispossessed of its ancient military and judicial prerogatives and consigned to the realm of worldly pleasures. But fashion had been linked to the change in status of the nobility even before the absolutist court came into its own. Beginning in the late fourteenth century, at the very moment when the extravagances of fashion were about to have free rein, the nobilitv found its prestige and political power diminishing. Knights were no longer masters of war; their castles now succumbed to artillery fire; on the battlefield it was infantrymen and archers on the ground who prevailed. The decline of the cavalry was echoed not only in the rise of new chivalric orders but also in an excess of spending on dress, an immoderate taste for luxury and ostentation. Far from emblematizing the supremacy of the nobility, fashion attests much more to its continuous weakening since the late Middle Ages, to its progressive metamorphosis into a “spectacular" class that has self-advanceinent by sumptuary expense for display purposes as one of its major obligations. However important these phenomena may be, we must make no mistake about it: they leave the heart of the problem unexplored. What caused the rule of lavish expense to turn into an excess of precious elegance? Always the same question: why the move beyond sumptuosity itself to the escalation of change and extravagance? In opposition to the prevailing theories, it is necessary to reassert that class rivalries are not the principle underlying the incessant variations of fashion. No doubt class rivalries accompany these variations and determine certain of their aspects; they do not unlock their secret. The interrogation of fashion requires a paradigm change. This theoretical displacement can be outlined in broad strokes: fashion's constant shifts result above all from a new position and representation of the individual in relation to the collective whole. Fashion is not the corollary of conspicuous consumption and of strategies of class distinction, it is the corollary of a new relation between the self and others. of the desire to assert one's own personality, a desire that emerged among the upper classes during the late Middle Ages. It is because the role of the representation of the individual has not been given its due that the explanations of change in fashion remain so unconvincing. Far from being an epiphenomenon, the consciousness of being an individual with a particular destiny, the will to express a unique identity, the cultural celebration of personal identity were “productive forces," the very driving forces of the mutability of fashion. In order for the surge of frivolous changes to come about, a revolution was required in the representation of individual human beings and in their sense of self, upsetting traditional mentalities and values; we had to wait for the exaltation of human uniqueness and its complement, the social promotion of signs of personal difference. At the end of the Middle Ages, indeed, we can observe an unprecedented increase in awareness of subjective identity, a new desire to express individual uniqueness, a new exaltation of individuality. In chronicles and memoirs, care is taken to mark the speaker's identity with a canonical formula, "the first-person pronoun followed by the author's name and surname, title and rank."31 In poetic works, intimate confidences are intensified, expressing outpourings of the self, fleeting experiences, and personal memories. The appearance in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries of "realistic" autobiographies, portraits, and self-portraits rich in accurate details also reveals the new dignity recognized in what is singular in human beings, although in contexts that were still chiefly coded and symbolic. What Philippe Ariès calls the "death of the self" is another illustration of that same tendency, one that breaks with the traditionally anonymous space of death: in the late Middle Ages, the iconography of the Last Judgment, the Book of Life, macabre themes, testaments, and personalized burial places were all sigus of a desire for individualization, a concern with being oneself, a promotion of personal identity.32 This new sense of personal identity and the legitimation of individual expression, even if they prevailed only within the confines of the small world of the social elite, and even if they were more a matter of formulas and life experience than of doctrine, allowed the protean logic of fashion to come into play. The requirement that one be oneself, the passionate attachment to marks of personality, and the social celebration of individuality had a number of effects: they facilitated the break with respect for tradition, they allowed sites of initiative and innovation to proliferate, they stimnulated private imagination in a quest for novelty, difference, and originality. The affirmation of the uomo singolare set off a process of constant innovation in forms and styles, a process of rupture with respect to the fixed traditional standard. By the end of the Middle Ages, the individualization of appearance had been legitimized: to be unlike others, to be unique, to attract attention by displaying signs of difference—these became legitimate aspirations and passions in the world of the courts. Under such conditions, the precipitous movement of fashion is comprehensible. Self-awareness and the desire to stand out foster rivalry, competition among individuals, a race toward difference: they authorize and encourage the expression of individual tastes. Under such conditions, the acceleration of new ideas and the speeded-up and lasting search for new signs are virtually inevitable. Innovation unquestionably remained a class privilege, an attribute of those at the top of the social hierarchy. But its importance lies elsewhere: the people at the summit had begun to glory in their ability to modify their environment, to invent new artifices, to personalize their own appearance Such a transformation in the behavior of the social elite attests to the infiltration of a new social representation of individuality in the aristocratic universe. This was not a class phenomenon as such, but rather the penetration into the upper classes of a new way of looking at individual personality. The new ideas helped unsettle the immobility of tradition; they allowed individual difference to become a sign of social excellence. The perpetual variations of fashion cannot be separated from the more or less ostentatious personalization of appearance; the two phenomena are rigorously complementary faces of the new social valorization of the singular. Theories of fashion have been mistaken in viewing these two issues as unrelated; in reality. a single phenomenon is involved. Fashion was able to become the permanent theater of ephemeral metamorphoses because the individualization of appearance had won a new status of social legitimacy. Conversely, all the changes and trends would allow private individuals at least a minimal margin of freedom, choice, and autonomy in matters of taste. At the same time, the meaning of change in cultural affairs was turned inside out. What had previously inspired fear and mistrust became a social value, an object of unbridled passions in the highest social circles. “Everything that changes loses value," a twelfth-century poem maintained, remaining within the rigid confines of the traditional mentality. The inconstancy of fashion reveals, on the contrary, that that traditional system was being left behind, at least in part. An unprecedented social value was beginning to radiate, that of novelty.33 Fashion could not have existed without this reversal of the relation to historical evolution and to ephemera. In order for fashion to come into being, the “modern" had to be accepted and desired; the present had to be deemed more prestigious than the past; in an unprecedented move, what was novel had to be invested with dignity. The sources of this fundamental reversal in the temporal orientation of social life are quite complex, but the shift has to be linked in particular to the recognition of the right of private individuals to set themselves apart, to singularize their own appearance, and thus to change. With the new position of the social body in relation to the collective standard, a new social relationship to movement was established: the legitimacy of innovation and of the social present was tightly linked with the advent of the individualist-aesthetic logic as a logic of difference and autonomy. ## The Aesthetics of Seduction However fundamental the consecration of individuality and novelty may have been for the establishment of fashion, it does not suffice to make the phenomenon fully intelligible. A logic as complex as that of fashion. embracing so many aspects of social, individual. cultural, and aesthetic life, could emerge only owing to the synergistic interaction of a multitude of factors, each of which, while not always absolutely independent of the others, had its own impact. In addition to the social phenomena already mentioned (court society, the status of the aristocracy. the development of cities), other phenomena also played crucial roles. The encouragement of secular individuality, the overinvestment in personal appearance. the refinement and aestheticization of the forms that characterize fashion are all rooted in a cluster of cultural factors distinctive to the West. This point must be emphasized: in the genealogy of fashion, the factors that were determining in the last analysis were the values. meaning systems, tastes. and standards, the "superstructures" that accounted for the emergenceunique in human experience—of the passion for novelty. By substituting reference to the present for reference to the past, fashion instituted a radical break in the order of legitimate time. However, this historical discontinuity does not preclude viewing fashion as a system that maintained the tastes, life-styles, and secular ideas that preceded the sense of modernity. The consecration of ephemera lies indeed in a straight line of descent from the standards of chivalric, courtly culture, with its aspiration to terrestrial joy and happiness: the joys of fighting in wars and tournaments, the joys of hunting, the pleasures of elegant feasts and festivals the pleasures of games and of gallant verse, the love of display and spectacle.3+ The ethos of aristocratic pleasure was unquestionably a crucial factor in the appearance of the homo frirolus: fashion is a practice of pleasures, synonymous with the pleasure of pleasing, surprising, or astonishing. Furthermore. it is a pleasure produced by the stimulus of change, the metamorphosis of forns. of self and others. Fashion is not merely a mark of social distinction, it is also an enhancement, a pleasure for the eye, the pleasure of difference. The reign of fashion that was instituted at the end of the Middle Ages must not be conceived as an escape, as a way of inuring oneself to the misfortunes and anxieties of the times. It had much more direct continuity with the standards and mind-sets characteristic of lordly circles. of aristocrats avid for worldly satisfactions. That quest for enjoyment grew apace with the development of the great courts and courtly civility, and it also paralleled a new feeling for the duration of human life. From the hunanists' writings we know that starting with the trecento the sense of the fleeting nature of earthly time was intensified: expressions of regret about aging. nostalgia for youth, a sense of the imminence of the end took on new accents.35 This new collective sensibility, henceforth inseparable from modernity. unquestionably fostered the accelerated quest for pleasure. Fashion reflects a passionate love of life and happiness, an exacerbation of the desire to make the most of the earthly joys made possible by the values of chivalric life and court society, as well as by a modern sensibility already marked by a melancholy sense of time and anguish at the prospect of departing earthly life. Increased intensity and precipitation in the quest for worldly pleasures were coupled with a process of stylization of tastes and standards of living. The emergence of fashion cannot be dissociated from the cultural revolution that was launched in the lordly class, at the turn of the eleventh century, by the development of courtly values. The ideal of chivalrous life was updated: the traditional requirements of strength, prowess, and generosity were supplemented by new standards advocating the idealization of women, delicacy of speech, good manners, literary talent, and gallant preciosity. The knight was transformed into a literary figure, a poet; the love of fine language and later of fine objects gained sway in worldly circles Fashion was forged by this slow civilizing of manners and pleasures, by the new refined, aestheticized ideal. In a sense, the way had been paved for fashion more than two centuries before it emerged, with the advent of the courtly spirit that outdid itself with poetry and delicate preciosity. An art of nuances and surface refinements, fashion coupled a passion for beautiful objects and works of art with the aspiration to a more beautiful and stylized life that arose at the dawn of the twelfth century. Fashion appeared in the century in which art presented a clear tendency toward decorative excess: the proliferation of ornament, the profusion of caprices in flamboyant architecture, the exacerbations of Ars Nova, the elegant modulations of Gothic miniatures. This is also the age of eccentric dress, culminating at the court of Charles VI and the dukes of Burgundy with clothing that was half-red, half-purple, or blue and yellow, with women's hairdos in sugarloaf style, the hennin, heads shaved at the temples and above the forehead, capes in the form of cockscombs, sleeves wide enough to touch the ground. There is no denying it: all these novelties, with their exaggerations and their excesses, constituted just one manifestation among many others of the need for aestheticism, the cult of ornament and spectacle that characterized the late Middle Ages but lasted well beyond that time. The fourteenth and fifteenth centuries saw the emergence of a baroque spirit, a taste for theatrical and fanciful decors, an attraction to exoticism and rarity, gratuitous fancies corresponding to the triumph of courtly culture with its ideal of play and worldly preciosity. The undulating circuit of forms and the profuse wealth of ornamentation in art were now echoed by the strange, extravagant, sophisticated costumes of the court and nocturnal festivals. The influence of the spirit of play dominating the courtly imagination gave rise to an optics of theatricality, an imperious need for effect, a propensity for emphasis, excess, and the picturesque that are particularly characteristic of fashion: this courtly art remained dominated by the baroque spirit at least until the purist and modernist ruptures of the twentieth century. For from the mid-fourteenth century on, at the deepest level, fashion has remained under the sway of fascination with effect and artifice, with luxuriance and refinement in decorative detail. In art, baroque and classical forms alternate and sometimes merge; in fashion, the baroque spirit has never ceased to reign. The emergence of fashion attests to an evolution of taste infatuated with the mannered embellishment of forms; it is much more a sign of the progress of aesthetic enjoyment than a sign of the rise of wealth or even of the new system of social relations characteristic of court societies. As an art of small differences and subtleties in personal appearance fashion expresses a refinement of visual pleasure. The time has come to offer a slight correction to Lucien Febvre's now classic thesis concerning the “underdevelopment of sight" and the absence of visual poetry in the Renaissance.30 Even if writers and poets of the period did make greater use of acoustic and olfactory images and did not evoke physical shapes, figures, or colors to any significant extent, that observation hardly suffices to justify a diagnosis according to which sight plays a subordinate role with respect to a dominant sensitivity to odors, perfumes. sounds, and voices The development of fashion compels us to reconsider that judgment in part, if it is true that we cannot conceive of fashion without scrupulous attention to individual details, without a search for nuances, without a poeticization of the morphological differences between the sexes. How can we see Renaissance men only as creatures lacking a cultivated visual sense not very sensitive to the grace of forms, attracted only by bright and contrasting colors, when we see fashion coming into its own in all its ornamental sophistication, when we see sixteenth-century braiding, lace, and embroidery motifs being diversified, when we see dress following and emphasizing the lines of the body? Fashion and visual refinement are inseparable: fashion consecrates the progress of the aesthetic gaze in worldly spheres. We must take another look at courtly culture and its most original invention, love, and briefly recall what courtly love instituted that was new: sublimation of the sex drive. a "detached" cult of love, along with the overvaluation and lyric celebration of the beloved, submission and obedience on the part of the lover toward the lady; all these features characteristic of Provençal love gradually succeeded, in courtly circles, in transforming the relations between the sexes, and more specifically the relations of seduction. From time immemorial warriors have won women's love by accomplishing feats and exploits in their honor; love is earned by masculine virtues. daring. and heroic devotion. This chivalric notion of love had been pursued for centuries; however, beginning around ıoo it became subject to the civilizing influence of courtly love. Thus warlike heroism gave way to a lvric and sentimental heroism; according to the new code of love, the lord plays the game of living on his knees before the woman he adores. He languishes: he showers her with attention; he shows that he is a slave to her whims: and he is obliged to celebrate her beauty and her virtues in verses of praise. This is the beginning of what René Nelli calls the poeticization of courtship";37 vulgar language, traditional jokes, ribaldrv. and obscenities are ruled out in favor of discretion and respectful humility, noble language and gallant exaltation on the lover's part. From this point on. seduction required attentiveness and delicacy toward women; it required stylized plav, a poetics of language and behavior. Fashion, with its variations and its subtle play of nuance, must be viewed as a continuation of this new poetics of seduction. Just as men had to please women through good manners and lyricism, so they had to present an increasingly sophisticated appearance; they had to offer a studied look just as they offered studied speech. Preciosity of dress was an extension and a counterpart of the stylization of love. Fashion and the artifice it requires cannot be detached from the new image of femininity, from the strategy of seduction by aesthetic signs. At the same time, within the higher reaches of lay society the overvaluation of women and the way feminine beauty was extolled helped expand and legitimize women's taste for ornamentation and makeup, although the taste itself had been present from earliest antiquity. Courtly love is doubly implicated in the genesis of fashion. On the one hand, by decreeing that true love should be sought outside marriage, that pure love was extraconjugal, courtly love discredited the institution of marriage; it legitimized a lady's free choice of lover and thus supported autonomy of feeling. In this sense, courtly love contributed to the process of human individualization; it helped encourage the development of the worldly individual with relatively independent tastes, detached from the traditional standard. We have already noted the intimate link that connects fashion with the modern consecration of individuality. On the other hand, more directly, courtly love produced a new relationship between the sexes; it inaugurated a new mechanisımn of gallant seduction that played a major role in the process of aestheticizing appearance that we know as fashion. The modifications in the structure of men's and women's clothing that held sway from 135o on are directly symptomatic of this aesthetic of seduction. From then on, dress marked a radical difference between the masculine sphere and the feiinine; it sexualized appearance as never before. As we saw earlier, masculine clothing outlined the waist with the short doublet, and it emphasized the legs by encasing them in long breeches: simultaneously, the new feminine line molded the body and enphasized the hips, while low necklines revealed the shoulders and bust. Clothing thus made a point of exhibiting the charms of the body by accentuating the differences between the sexes. The padded doublet added contour to the male chest; trouser openings sometimes had a phallic shape. Beginning somewhat later and continuing for four centuries. the framework of the whalebone corset made it possible to compress the female waist and raise the bustline. Fashionable clothes became seductive costumes outlining the attractions of the body, revealing and concealing the allure of sex. stirring up erotic charms: no longer merely a hierarchic symbol. a sign of social status, dress had become an instrument of seduction with mysterious secret power, a means of pleasing and attracting attention that connoted luxury, fantasy, and stylized grace. Seduction broke loose from the timeless order of ritual and tradition; it started on its lengthy modern career by individualizing, at least partially, the signs associated with clothing. by idealizing and exacerbating the sensuality of appearance. As a dynamie of excess and amplification, an accumulation of artifice and ostentatious preciosity, fashionable dress attests that we have already moved into the modern age of seduction, the age of the aestheties of personality and sensuality. But a change in sexual strategies of seduction is not the only thing at stake. We cannot fail to connect the emergence of fashion with another form of seduction that is represented, beginning in the thirteenth century, by perceptible manifestations of the world in Western art. Life on earth had become an object of delectation; it was judged beautiful and worthy of attention, and it gave rise, among artists, to an inereasingly pronounced attention to aesthetic considerations. Medieval art developed a new way of looking at the terrestrial world, at the material environment: expressions of unknowable mystery and the impersonal superhuman dimension lost ground to the discovery and description of real life on earth in all its diversity. Gothic sculptors replaced fantastic monsters with the living animals, woodlands. gardens, and leaves of their imnmediate surroundings. They represented handmade works, and brought God closer to human beings by propagating a more feminine and maternal image of the Virgin and a Christ marked by gentleness and humanity. This artistic realism of medieval origin took on a new dimension in the Renaissance, with the quest for depth and relief in the arts of portraiture, landscape, and still life. The sense of the concrete, the interest in visual experience and appearances in art, is extremely important: it reflects a glorification of the created world, a valorization of the beauties of human life on earth. The new investment in the secular realm turns up again in fashion and contributes to its development. Indeed. fashion represents the frivolous dimension of this new love of appearances. this new spectacle of human beings that was taking shape in the West. The cult of fantasy that is manifested in fashion and the "realism" that in one sense has never ceased to preside over the evolution of art are part of the same whole; in both cases, the same exaltation of the visible is at work. the same passion for perceptible detail, the same curiosity about individual features, the same immediate delight in surfaces, the same goal of aesthetic pleasure. The revolution in clothing that is at the basis of modern dress was supported by the artistic rehabilitation of the world. The love of the real in all its singularity. first manifested in Gothic art, favored the advent of a dress style expressing the charms and the individuality of human bodies. It is appropriate to stress that the fourteenth-century male garb with its short jacket was inseparable from "realism," that it was not a result but rather a forerunner of the fifteenth-century revolution in representation, that it played a role in the discovery of the human body by allowing artists to have "an almost anatomical vision of the trunk and the limbs."38 Such views are legitimate. provided one does not go too far in the portrayal of fashion as autonomous with respect to medieval art. It is not true that the new form of dress owed nothing to previous stylistic research; the short male costume is not the “earliest realism."39 Even if it did in fact antedate the Renaissance stvle, it actually extends over a longer time span the observation of and curiosity about reality that were already manifest in Gothic art. At the end of the Middle Ages, fashion extended to personal apparel a process of promoting appearance whose forerunner we have seen in Gothic art. Thus it is no accident that fashion and nude figures in painting belong to the same era: both phenomena manifest the same consecration of our earthly sojourn. No doubt nude figures stem from a return to the classics, from a renewed admiration for ancient models; but beyond the resurrection of antiquity we must not lose sight, as Emile Mâle reminded us, of the continuity in which Western art is inscribed, inasınuch as it allowed for the rehabilitation of visible things, the love of divine creatures, as early as the Gothic era. In the same way, if the emergence of fashion coincided with the advancement of secular values at the heart of the upper classes, that advancement was inseparable from a religious framework, in this case that of Christianity. The Christian faith, which had offered the most categorical opposition to worldly vanities, contributed, although indirectly, to the establishment of fashion's reign. Through the dogma of the God-man and the correlative revalorization and legitimation of the terrestrial sphere, of perceptible and visual data,\*⁰ the religion of the Incarnation facilitated the appearance of fashion. Just as Christianity, at least as a symbolic framework. made possible the modern possession and exploitation of nature.1 so the Christian religion provided the matrix of meaning that allowed fashion to develop as an autonomous aesthetic order that could become the exclusive province of human caprice. Christianity was able to accomplish this paradoxical task, one so obviously in contradiction to its imperative of salvation, chiefly through the mediation of art. Christian art reconciled itself to our earthly sojourn; its stylistic glorification of the reign of creatures had eventual repercussions in the sphere of adornment in dress. Fashion was not born of the social dynamic alone, nor even of the emergence of secular values; at the deepest level, it required a unique religious schema, that of the Incarnation, which led to an investment in the here and now, lending dignity to the terrestrial sphere, to individual forms and appearances. Within the framework of a religion based on the full humanity of the Savior, the created world can be lauded for its beauty: the originality and charms of appearance can gain legitimacy: costume can outline and amplify the beauties of the body. Fashion succeeded in taking root only in the West, precisely where the Christian religion developed. This is no accident: an intimate although paradoxical bond unites the homo frirolus and the homo religiosus in the specific case of Christianity. ## 