Open Fashion oday's FAshion is no longer modeled on the system embodied in the hundred years' fashion. Since the 1950s and 196os. organizational. social. and cultural transformations have thoroughly disrupted the earlier structure; we can reasonably conclude that a new stage in the history of fashion has come into view. One thing needs to be made clear at the outset: the emergence of a new system does not by any means signify a historical rift. a total break in continuity with the past. At the deepest level. the second phase of modern fashion continues and extends the most modern contributions of the hundred years' fashion, namely. a bureaucratic production orchestrated by professional creators, an industrial logic of mass production, seasonal collections, fashion shows with live models used for advertising purposes. However, this large-scale organizational continuity is matched by an equally large-scale reconfiguration of the system. New centers of creation have emerged, and new criteria have been imposed. The earlier hierarchical and unitary configuration has exploded. The individual and social meanings of fashion have changed along with the tastes and behaviors of women and men. 'These are all aspects of a crucial restrueturing that nevertheless continues to reinscribe the secular preeminence of the feminine and to perfect the triple logic of modern fashion. with its bureaucratic and aesthetic face, its industrial face, and its democratic individualist face. ## Ready-to-Wear: The Democratic Revolution The golden age of modern fashion had Parisian haute couture as its epicenter: a laboratory for the creation of novelty, a global pole of attraction, and the focus of imitation for both manufacturing and small-scale dressmaking. This aristocratie and centralized phase is over. 'The haute couture houses continue to present their sumptuous twice-yearly creations in Paris, of course, before the international press. They still enjoy an illustrious reputation, and can boast of continually growing worldwide profits throughout economic slumps.' Nevertheless, beneath the surface continuity. haute couture has lost its earlier avant-garde status. It has ceased to be the focal point and center of live fashion, even though its vocation and activities have undergone a significant updating. In the i9bos, certain fashion houses could still survive, for the most part, on made-to-order work. In 1975. the made-to-order component accounted for no more than 18 percent of direct profits (excluding perfumes) of the haute couture houses: in 1985. the figure was down to 12 percent. Employment figures also reflect this irreversible evolution. In the 192os, Patou employed thirteen hundred people in its workshops: before the war, twenty-five hundred people worked for Chanel: in the mid-195os, Dior had twelve hundred employees. In 1985. the twenty-one houses classified as “Couture-Creation" employed only two thousand workers altogether in their made-toorder workshops. and they provided made-to-order clothing for no more than three thousand women throughout the world. In fact, the haute couture houses remain prosperous now solely through their ready-to-wear lines. licensing contracts, and perfumes. Since the turn of the century. these houses have always been associated with perfumes and cosmetics. Paul Poiret was the first to launch a line of perfumes ("Rosine"). in 19I. Chanel followed suit. with the celebrated “No. 5,” in 1921. Mme Lanvin created "Arpège" in 1923; Patou came out with “Joy, -the world's most expensive perfume." in 193o. The idea bore fruit: in 1978, Nina Ricci's perfumes made a profit of 1.2 billion francs, accounting for more than 9c percent of the hrand's overall profits; Chanel's perfumes accounted for 94 percent of overall profits. In 1981, haute couture's overall profits. excluding perfume. came to 6 billion francs; with perfumes, the total was 11 billion. In the mid-198os, Lanvin's perfumes accounted for 50 percent of the firm's overall profits, and Chanel's "No. 5," the most widely sold French perfume in the world, is thought to bring in more than \$50 million a year all by itself. Since the 196os, all the couture houses have embarked on a lucrative race for licensing agreements that involve not only perfumes and cosmetics but also a great variety of other articles: glasses, leather goods. tableware, cigarette lighters, pens, underwear, sailboards. men's and women's ready-to-wear. As of the mid-i98os, Saint-Laurent was deriving nearly 68 percent of its profits from royalties, Lanvin 6o percent, Dior 3c percent. Cardin was relying on more than 6oo French and foreign licenses; Lanvin had 120, Nina Ricci 18o. Even though some houses have a much more restricted licensing policy (licensing accounts for just 3 percent of Chanel's profits), the haute couture sector as a whole can survive only because of the substantial profits realized by the sale of its prestigious brand names: perfumes and cosmetics aside, royalty profits are seven times higher than profits from direct production. Not only has couture's made-to-order role—the sublime expression of the hundred years' fashion—atrophied due to a drastic reduction in its clientele, but haute couture no longer dresses women in “the latest thing. It aims much more at perpetuating the great tradition of luxury and professional virtuosity. Its goals are essentially promotional: brand-name advertising for high-fashion ready-to-wear and the other items sold under its labels worldwide. Neither classical nor avant-garde, haute couture no longer produces the latest fashion; instead, it reproduces its own "eternal" trademark by creating masterpieces of execution, prowess. and aesthetic gratuitousness: unprecedented, unique, sumptuous attire transcending the ephemeral reality of fashion itself. Once the spearhead of fashion. haute couture today is becoming a fashion museum, in a pure aesthetics that has shed its earlier commercial obligations. The new haute couture is paradoxical: it couples fashion with absolutes. frivolity with perfection: it no longer creates for anyone. It enacts a detached aesthetic folly all the better in that this approach best corresponds to market interests. In this new phase, in which haute couture has been transformed into a display window for advertising pure prestige, there is more than the peculiar fate of a dynamic institution that has made a successful conversion to readyto-wear and licensing; there is also a change of fundamental importance for the centuries-long history of Western fashion. Supreme luxury and fashion have gone their separate ways: luxury is no longer the privileged embodiment of fashion, and fashion is no longer identified with ostentatious expense, even euphemistically. However, the real revolution that destroyed the architecture of the hundred years' fashion is the one that overturned the logic of industrial production. This revolution corresponds to the emergence and development of what Americans were the first to call ready-to-wear. J. C. Weill introduced the corresponding term prêt-à-porter in France, in an effort to disengage manufactured clothing from its poor publie image. Unlike traditional manufacturing, ready-to-wear committed itself to a new path: an industrial production of clothing accessible to all that would nevertheless be "fashion," inspired by the latest trends of the day. Whereas manufactured apparel was often characterized by defective cuts, careless finishing, poor quality, and a lack of imagination, ready-to-wear sought to blend industry and fashion; it sought to put novelty, style. and aesthetics on the streets. Starting in the early 1950s, Parisian department stores such as Galeries Lafayette, Printemps. and Prisunie introduced fashion advisors and coordinators into their purchasing departments in order to win over the manufacturers and offer their own clientele more up-to-date products.2 In the United States and later in France, the ready-to-wear industry gradually became aware of the need to hire designers, to offer apparel that had added aesthetic value, that was fashionable. The first women's readyto-wear salon in France was held in 1957, and toward the end of the decade the first independent Office of Fashion Advisors (Conseils et Styles) appeared. In 1958, C. de Coux founded "Relations Textiles"; in 1961, Maïmé Arnodin created a fashion bureau that was a forerunner of Promostyl, set up in 1966.3 To a certain extent, mass production of clothing followed the same path industrial design had followed in the 193os. It was a matter of producing cloth and woolen fabrics that integrated novelty, fantasy, and aesthetic creation, following the model of fashion with its seasonal collections. With the advent of designers, mass industrial apparel changed status: it became a full-fledged fashion product. The earliest ready-towear labels appeared in advertisements shortly thereafter. Still. before the late 195os, ready-to-wear was not very creative in aesthetic terms. Governed by an earlier logic, it was a watered-down imitation of the new forms introduced by haute couture. Ready-to-wear finally came into its own. as it were, in the i96os, by creating clothes in a spirit oriented more toward daring, vouthfulness, and novelty than toward "class" perfection. A new breed of creators rose to the top, people who— for the first time——were not part of haute couture. In 1959, Daniel Hechter launched the Babette style and the cassock-style coat; in 196o, Cacharel reinvented women's blouses. using madras in a simple style that closely resembled men's shirts. In 1963, in London, Mary Quant created the Ginger Group. which came up with the miniskirt. In i963, too, Christine Bailly began to innovate with her wide capelike coats. Michèle Rosier revolutionized winter sports clothes by offering a close-to-the-body silhouette with a cosmic flair. Emmanuelle Kahn and Elie Jacobson (Dorothée Bis) were also part of that first generation of designers who presided over the birth of sportswear. unconfining apparel that was youthful in spirit.\* In the 1970s and 198os, a second and third wave of designers gave impetus to the most important innovations in professional fashion. Kenzo galvanized fashion in the early 197os with his flat-chested cuts derived from kimonos, his taste for colors and flowers, his blend of East and West. Mugler offered a feminine archetype from cinema and science fiction. Montana created voluminous, broad-shouldered garments. Chantal Thomas revealed an elegant and mischievous silhouette that was at once decent and insolent. J.-P. Gaultier played at being the bad boy of fashion by using humor and mockery and by blending genres and periods. The Japanese creators Issey Miyake and Rei Kawakubo upset the traditional structure of clothing. Since 1975, some of these designers and a few others (P. Moréni, Sonia Rykiel, A. Alaïa, and so on) have had ties to the major couturiers and their establishment: they have been designated creators of fashion. During these transitional years, nevertheless, haute couture did not stand still. The 196os were the last decade in which haute couture continued to fulfill its revolutionary vocation in matters of style—above all via the “Courrèges effect." Indeed, Courrèges's 1965 collection, in which he introduced a short, structured style, constituted a fashion event to such a degree that the publicity impact of the press photos published around the world was evaluated at four to five billion francs in 1965 terms. Courrèges's modernism was resolutely future oriented: the fashion he developed emancipated women from high heels, constraining bustlines, tight clothing, and closely fitted hips in favor of structured attire that allowed freedom of movement. The miniskirt had already appeared in England in 1963,. but Courrèges managed to put his own stamp on it. With its lowheeled boots, its use of pure white, its references to schoolgirls wearing socks, its geometric dynamism, the Courrèges stvle registered the irresistible rise of specifically juvenile or teenage values in fashion. After the young woman of the 192os, it was unequivocally the young girl who now found herself on a pedestal as the prototype of fashion. In addition. haute couture sanctioned women's trousers: in i96o. Balenciaga began to create evening outfits based on white pants, and Yves Saint-Laurent included pants in his collections in 1966; he had his models wear evening trousers and women's tuxedos. In i968, Saint-Laurent launched the bush jacket: his safari style was highly influential in the 197os. In an interview at about the same time, he proclaimed: "Down with the Ritz: long live the street!" Coming from a major couturier, such a provocative statement verges on dandyism; nevertheless, it does express the new position of haute couture in the creation of fashion. Haute couture had in fact stopped setting the tone in fashion matters; ready-to-wear, off-the-rack clothing had been constituted as an “autonomous" fashion center. By the time haute couture introduced women's pants into its collections. women had already adopted them on a massive scale: in 1965. more women's pants were produced industrially than skirts. And in 1966. when Saint-Laurent included jeans in his collections, they had long since been adopted by the young as the apparel of choice. "You have to go into the streets."" After playing a pioneering role, haute couture in the narrow sense had become primarily a prestige-generating institution that did more to consecrate innovations produced elsewhere than to drive the cutting edge of fashion Haute couture, initially reticent if not actively hostile toward ready-towear, finally grasped how valuable the new methods could be when they were coupled with its own capital of prestige. ln 1959. Pierre Cardin presented the first ready-to-wear couture collection at the department store Printemps; he later remarked, speaking of this event: "I established the T.N.P. [National Popular 'Theater] of couture."? He opened the first ready-to-wear department in 1963, and he was also the first of the couturiers to sign agreements with the major ready-to-wear manufacturers, exploiting the prestige of his label. ln i966, Yves Saint-Laurent created the first ready-to-wear collection conceived in terms of industrial requirements and not as an adaptation of haute couture. At the same time, he opened the first Saint-Laurent Rive-Gauche shop, and in $\mathrm { 1 9 8 3 – 8 4 }$ , the Saint-Laurent Variation line, at prices 40 percent lower than Rive-Gauche. In 1985, women's ready-to-wear amounted to 33 percent of haute couture's direct profits, excluding perfume. The refocusing of haute couture turned it not only toward mass production but also, starting in 196ı under Cardin's initiative, toward men's ready-to-wear. The institution that had symnbolized the influence of the feminine for a century now created and presented seasonal collections for men. Far from being a passing fad, the new niche continued to expand. In 1975. men's ready-to-wear represented 8 percent of haute couture's direct profits: by 1985. the figure had gone up to 19.5 percent. The end of made-to-measure and thus of two-tiered fashion under the aegis of haute couture on the one hand, a generalization of ready-to-wear and a dissemination of creative centers on the other hand: this schema summarizes the transformation of the fashion system. Technological improvements in the garment industry coupled with the emergence of designers and ready-to-wear virtually abolished the opposition that had structured the hundred years fashion, the opposition between made-toorder and ready-to-wear. The age of made-to-order was past,8 and even where it subsisted it had lost its premium on taste; on the contrary, readyto-wear creations came to embody the spirit of fashion in its most vital expression. Whatever differences in value and quality might characterize ready-to-wear articles, the new age marked a supplementary stage in the democratic organization of fashion, since an essentially homogeneous industrial production had been substituted for a heterogeneous system of made-to-order and mass production. The hundred years' fashion, with its dual made-to-order/mass-produced organization, was a hybrid formation, half aristocratic and half democratic. By getting rid of the ostentatiously elitist sector and by universalizing the system of mass production, ready-to-wear gave a boost to the democratic dynamics that had been partially put into play in the earlier phase. Thus the opposition between original luxury creation and industrial mass production ceased to govern the operation of the new system. True, avant-garde collections still appeared every season, presented by the great creators of ready-to-wear; still, mass industrial fashions for their part could no longer be written off as vulgar and degraded copies of the most admired prototypes. The distribution of ready-to-wear took on relative autonomy with respect to the quest for innovation: fashion's new deal took the form of spiraling audacity and extravagance on the creators' part, decreased mimetic subordination on the part of the major industrial producers. As the ready-to-wear manufacturers began to appeal to designers, as fantasy, sports, and humor came into their own as dominant values, as fashion stopped obligatorily excluding the previous year's trends from one year to the next, apparel in the major mass-production lines gained in quality, aesthetic value, and originality, even if there was no comparison with the “follies" of the couturiers' and creators' collections. The disjunction between luxury models and industrial or artisanal imitations was preponderant when the legislation of haute couture still had its full authoritv: it faded away as fashion became multifarious and allowed the most disparate styles to coexist. How can we still speak of imitation when the industrial ready-to-wear collections are prepared two years in advance. when fashion bureaus take it upon themselves to invent and define their own fashion themes? This does not mean that avant-garde creations are no longer taken into account, but it does mean that they no longer have the power to impose themselves as exclusive models for reference. High fashion is now no more than one source of free inspiration: many others (lifestyles, sports, films, the prevailing mood, exoticism. and so on) are equally important. While centers of inspiration are proliferating. and subordination to models viewed as le dernier cri is weakening. industrial apparel has entered the era of aesthetic creation and personalization. The mass-market product is no longer an inferior reflection of a prestigious prototype. it is an original re-creation, a specific synthesis of industrial requirements and the designer system. It takes concrete form in clothing that offers diversified, consumer-oriented combinations of classicism and originality seriousness and frivolousness, reasonableness and novelty. The ready-to-wear system tends to lessen the anonymity characteristic of earlier industrial production, and to produce articles with a creative "bonus," added aesthetic value, and a personalized cachet. The democraticization of fashion continues apace: the epoch in which mass industrial fashion arose, a period of mediocre quality lacking in style and inspiration, has given way to a period in which the ready-to-wear industry offers explicitly fashion-oriented products of aesthetic quality at reasonable prices. The democratization of the system depends not only on the de facto dismissal of haute couture, but especially on the concomitant promotion of fashion quality in mass apparel. The qualitative progress made by industrial fashion is difficult to deny. Whereas couturier- and designerbased ready-to-wear accounts for roughly 4o percent of the national market in France, many highly reputed creators work or have worked as freelance designers for mass-market ready-to-wear firms. The Trois Suisses catalog has even proposed clothing signed P. Moréni, Alaïa. J.-P. Gaultier and I. Miyake, at mass-market prices. The logic of mass production has been overtaken by a process of personalization that gives priority to creative dynamism wherever it is found, that multiplies styles and variations and substitutes aesthetic innovation for mimetic reproduction.º Mass fashion has changed character in the democratic age of overabundant choice, in the era of modest items and inexpensive "coordinates," under the seductive influence of what is "nice and inexpensive" and of the relation between aesthetic value and price. The ready-to-wear industry has managed to turn fashion into a radically democratic system only because it has succeeded in meeting the democratic aspiration to fashion. The ready-to-wear revolution is inseparable from the significant progress achieved in the technology of clothing manufacture, progress that has made it possible to produce articles of very good quality in huge quantities at low cost. But the revolution cannot be detached, either. from a new state of demand. After the Second World War, the desire for fashion spread widely: it became a generalized phenomenon involving all levels of society. At the heart of ready-to-wear we find this ultimate democratization of tastes in fashion, conveyed by movies and women's magazines. but also by the appetite for living in the present that has been stimulated by the new hedonistic mass culture. The rise in standards of living. the cult of well-being, leisure. and instant happiness have led to the ultimate stage in the legitimizing and democratizing of enthusiasm for fashion. Fashion's aesthetic and ephemeral signs no longer strike the lower classes as an inaccessible phenomenon reserved for others; they have become a mass demand, a life-style decor taken for granted in a society that holds change. pleasure, and novelty sacred. The era of readyto-wear coincides with the emergence of a society oriented more and more toward the present, a society rendered euphoric by novelty and consumption. Along with hedonistic culture, the emergence of “youth culture" has been an essential element in the stylistic evolution of ready-to-wear. This youth culture is undoubtedly linked to the baby boom of the 195os and to the rising buying power of the young, but at a deeper level it also appears as a broadened manifestation of individualist, democratic dynamics. This new culture was at the root of the rise of design in the 196os, a phenomenon not so much concerned with perfection as it was alert for creative spontaneity, originality, and immediate impact. In concert with the democratic exaltation of vouth, readv-to-wear itself embarked on a democratic rejuvenation of fashion prototypes. ## Labels Transformed Along with the aestheticization of industrial fashion, ready-to-wear succeeded in democratizing a symbol of high distinction that was once very selective, available to few consumers: the label. Prior to the 195os, in France, only a few haute couture houses had the privilege of being universally known; other couturiers had limited local reputations. The haute couture label and its immense notoriety were in striking contrast to the impersonality of industrial production. With the advent of ready-to-wear and its earliest advertising efforts came a mutation that was not only aesthetie but also symbolie. Industrial mass production emerged from anonymity: it became personalized as it won brand-name recognition. with names henceforth widely displaved on advertising billboards. in fashion magazines, in shopwindows, and on articles of clothing themselves. This democratic advancement and inflation of brand names constituted a major change of direction. Since the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. the best-known names and the most prestigious ones had been identical: now. consumers commit to memory certain mass-market brand names at least as readily as high-status labels: examples in the French context might include Levis. Rodier. New Man. Mie Mac. Marithé and François Girbaud. Lee Cooper. Manoukian, Benetton. Naf-Naf. and Jousse. This shift reflects the power of advertising, and above all the power of the industrial designer system. which succeeded in getting the publie to recognize and covet clothing produced in huge quantities at accessible prices. But the real revolution in the symbolie system of labeling came about with ready-to-wear creators. As early as the tobcs. with the designer phenomenon, new names came quickly to the fore. familiarizing the fashion world with labels as recognizable as those of haute couture. The fashion most prominent in the publie eye was no longer the exclusive property of haute couture: the new-wave creators and designers who followed and continued to proliferate represented the dynamie spearhead of fashion from that point on. 'Their prototypes regularly made the front pages of the trade publications; their collections were the objects of reports and evaluations on the same basis as those of haute couture. The ready-to-wear system gave rise to a new breed of innovators. and at the same time to a new category of labels that were well known in various circles. Of course. they were not so prestigious as the great names from the heroie period of couture. lndeed. no single name today. including those from the realm of haute couture. can achieve the extraordinary international acclaim that went along with the hundred years' fashion: no single name can compete any longer with the Chanel or Dior effect. On the one hand we find a proliferation of labels. and on the other a tendency toward a lowering of prestige from which everyone can protit. But above all, we encounter a diversification of the underpinnings of the system of legitimacies: fame is no longer tied to the art of embodying the ne plus ultra of upper-class chie. The factors that allow creators and designers today to distinguish themselves from their competitors and to make their names known on the seene of elegance through the trade press are. inereasingly. startling novelty. spectacular effects, departures from the norm, and emotional impact. In thi- period of eclectic legitimacies. creator- whose collections depend on radically heterogeneous criteria can achieve equal notoriety. After the monopoli-tic and ari-tocratic system of haute couture. fashion has arrived at a democratic pluralism of labels. If creator- and certain brand、 of ready-to-wear are praised to the skies. haute couture label- for their part are less subject to idolatry and worship than before. Haute couture i- gradually-slowly and unevenly from house to house—lo-ing it- position of lofty preeminence even as it comes to depend more and more on a politic、 of licensing contracts covering a wide range of articles. The decline in pre-tige is quite relative. moreover. as we can tell from the very comfortable—and rising—profit figures of the great hou-e- that have been able to perpetuate and exploit the notoriety of the Pari-ian label worldwide. Nevertheless. the licensing mechanism and especially the appearance of new centers of creation have led to the destabilization of the label -y-temn. a shift in the social representation of brand names. Thu- the women interviewed for a survey published in the September 1982 i-ue of Elle magazine did not make a meaningful distinction between the label, of couturiers. avant-garde creators. and mass-market ready-to-wear: Kenzo -tands next to Ted Lapidus and Cardin. Yves Saint-Laurent i- cited along-ide Cacharel. New Man. Karting. and Sonia Rykiel. The earlier pyramidal ystem is becoming blurred: for most people. telling brand name, apart ha, become an uncertain exercise. and haute couture no longer occupie, a position of unchallenged leadership. Clearly this does not mean that all brand names are equivalent: few consumers are unaware of the considerable variations in price that accompany the various labels But de-pite the price di-crepancies. a homogeneous hierarchy no longer preside, over the fa-hion system: no longer does a single agency monopolize taste and the aesthetics of forms. Thi- erosion of -tatu, and value must not be mistaken for ideological mvstification. a- if society were deluding itself about the way the field of fashion is actually divided up. (uite to the contrary. the phenomenon is in a way an accurate social perception of the transformations of the fashion stem di-engaged from the strict regime of haute couture and devoted to the creativity of the designer system and a multiplicity of criteria for appearance. On the one hand. ready-to-wear brand names are taking on heightened dignity: on the other. haute couture is undergoing a relative decline in notoriety. In the world of fashion. the blurring of lines continues the secular work of the equalization of conditions. This democratization of labels does not entail a homogeneous leveling by any means: coteries and hierarchies remain. but except for small minorities the frontiers are less clear-cut and less stable. The democratic process in fashion does not wipe out svmbolic differences among brands. but it does reduce extreme inequalities; it destabilizes the division between old-timers and newcomers, between the top level and the middle level, and it even allows certain mass-market articles to attain celebrity status. ## From a Class Aesthetics to a Youth Aesthetics The end of haute couture's symbolic preeminence has as its corollary the loss of its clientele. Some houses get a few dozen orders: the most highly rated may get a few hundred.1º This is the harsh realitv, in figures, of the present commercial situation of made-to-order couture. To be sure. the shrinking of its clientele cannot be separated either from haute couture's prohibitively high prices or from the fact that ready-to-wear now offers fashionable clothing of good quality, design. and originality at far lower cost (the average price of a designer's ready-to-wear dress is ten times lower than the price of a made-to-order haute couture dress). But no matter how significant the price factor may be. it does not suffice to explain why French haute couture has no more than three thousand clients worldwide. This apparently straightforward phenomenon warrants closer study. The example of the sociology of distinction might lead us to relate the decline of interest in haute couture to the restructuring of the dominant classes, to the emergence of a bourgeoisie typified by modernist and dynamic managers, a bourgeoisie that is defined less by economic capital than by "cultural capital" and that seeks more sober and more manifestly elitist signs in order to distinguish itself from the traditional bourgeoisie. in conformity with the primacy of the cultural capital that defines it and the "self-legitimacy" it procures." But that would amount to offering only a partial explanation. The access of women to higher education and to professions at the managerial level cannot provide a fundamental explanation for the decline in prestige of ostentatious luxury in dress, a decline that originated largely in an earlier period. The cultural capital of the dominant classes is not the most crucial factor; at the heart of the reorientation of haute couture lies something more than the emergence of a class "sure enough of its own legitimacy not to need to wear emblems of its authority."12 Assuming that the new bourgeoisie is indeed asserting itself more forcefully now than it did before, the mechanism that would allow its social legitimacy to neglect symbols of power is not clear. Quite to the contrary: even when it went unchallenged, the social hierarchy exhibited blatant signs of power and domination for thousands of years. And how could cultural capital on its own lead to the decline of marks of hierarchical superiority? As we have seen, the goal of understatement has its deepest roots less in symbolic—and episodic—class struggles than in the action, over time, of values that are consubstantial with modern society. Through its very problematics, the sociology of distinction is deaf to longterm movements; it cannot account for the threads linking the new with the old. The current situation of haute couture is a case in point: on the one hand, unquestionably, today's haute couture has broken with the hundred years fashion: on the other hand, today's haute couture appears as the culminating moment of an age-old tendency constitutive of democratic societies. There is historical discontinuity, indeed; but there is also, and to just as great an extent. an extraordinary consistency in the destiny of individual appearance. from the advent of the black dress suit for men to the contemporary desertion of made-to-order couture. The modern world could hardly have been propelled in that same direction, toward the reduction of insistent signs of appearance, if, over and above the interplay of symbolic class rivalries, consistent values providing direction to the desire for distinction had not come into play. If the logic of distinction were to govern the course of fashion in such a thorough way, we would see in fashion only chaos. momentary crazes, and sudden reversals. Yet that is hardly the case: over the long haul, modern fashion has obeyed an ordering principle, an influential tendency that is intelligible only when it is related to social and aesthetic goals that transcend class rivalry. Inconspicuous consumption originates in the convergent action of a cluster of values including the egalitarian ideal, modern art, sports, and closer to home—the new individualist ideal of the youthful look. Strategies for distinction have been not so much “creative" forces as instruments of this fundamental demnocratic movement, this synergistic constellation of new legitimacies that discredit strident markers of hierarchical superiority. The vogue for men's dark suits marked the break with the aristocratic imperative of lavish spending on clothes; thus men—who were in fact the first to enjoy modern democratic rights to the fullest—were the first to manifest the democratization of elegance. In the course of the twentieth century. women's fashion has come to align itself increasingly with the same democratic logic. With the demise of the made-to-order end of the couture spectrum, conspicuous consumption was definitively repudiated after the transitional moment represented, starting in the i92os, by haute couture's euphemized but still luxurious fashion. After that, not only were flashy displays rejected, but the very principle of luxury apparel lost its prestige and its age-old legitimacy, its capacity to arouse women's admiration and acquisitive desire. Women's fashion has been able to break free from the dominion of haute couture only with the help of the new values manifested by free societies in the stage of mass production and consumption. The universe of objects, media, and leisure has encouraged a hedonistic, juvenile mass culture to emerge; this culture is at the root of the ultimate decline of sumptuary fashion. The rise of a youth culture in the 1950s and 196os accelerated the diffusion of hedonistic values and helped give a new aspect to individualist claims. This new culture proclaimed its nonconformity and promoted new values: individual expression, relaxation, humor, and spontaneity. The Courrèges effect, the success of "style," and the first wave of ready-to-wear creators in the 196os all reflect, within the fashion system, the rise in the new contemporary values featuring rock stars and youthful idols: within a few years, "juniors" had become the prototypes of fashion. Aggressive forms, stylistic collages and juxtapositions. the careless look—such trends carried the day only because they were embodied in a culture ruled by irony, play, emotional shock effects. and liberated mores. Fashion began to connote youthfulness: it had to express an emancipated life-style, free of constraint, relaxed with respect to the official canon. This mass-culture galaxy is what undermined haute couture's predominance; the idealized meaning of "youthfulness" led to a detachment from luxury clothing, which was identified with the "old" world. Chic good taste and the distinction and "class" of haute couture were discredited by a new value system that advocated the destruction of conventions that promoted boldness and complicity, that privileged ideas over accomplishments, emotional impact over virtuosity. youthfulness over social respectability. This new system brought about a major reversal in models of behavior: “Before, a girl wanted to look like her mother. Todav. it's the other way around."13 Looking younger than one's years became much more important than exhibiting one's social rank: haute couture, with its great tradition of refinement, its styles intended for adult women who have "made it," was disqualified by the new requirement of modern individualism: a youthful appearance. The fate of haute couture did not depend on the dialectic of social pretension and class distinction: it depended on the age-old principle of the display of social excellence and its corollary. a promotion of an age-based code imposed on evervone in the name of the increasingly compelling code of individualism. Thus if individualist values made a critical contribution to the birth of haute couture at the outset, in a second phase they also lay behind the disaffection of its traditional clientele. Just as the requirement of dressing expensively was waning. all forms, styles, and materials were becoming legitimate in fashion. Clothes could be casual, crude, torn, worn, unstitched, sloppy, ripped, or frayed: all these features, which had been strictly taboo, began to be incorporated into the field of fashion. By recycling signs of "inferiority," fashion pursued its democratic dynamics, just as modern art and the avant-gardes have done since the mid-nineteenth century. The modernist integration of all subjects and materials into the noble field of art has as its counterpart the democratic respectability of faded jeans, sloppy sweaters, threadbare sneakers, "vintage" apparel, comic-strip graphics on T-shirts, ragged clothing. the "down-and-out" look, and high-tech diversions. The process of desublimation that had begun in the 192os came into its own. Elegance was reduced to a minimum: artificiality toyed with primitivism or the apocalypse: the dressed-up" look was scrupulously avoided; the welldressed look gave way to tattered pauperisin; "class" appeal was replaced by irony and eccentricity. The end of conspicuous consumnption in clothing and the introduction of humor and irreverence go hand in hand: together they mark the supreme stage in the democratization of fashion, the moment when fashion makes fun of itself. when elegance indulges in selfmockery. Only fashion photographs and the major fashion shows retained their magical dimensions and partly escaped the prevailing trend. The hushed ceremonial of haute couture pageants gave way to sound shows, unreal performances involving groups of models, hyperspectacular and fantastic podium effects——sublime advertising instruments for the artistic hallowing of labels. Still. this ultimate liturgy addressed to a select public did not exclude the process of democratic deidealization and proximity: not only did certain creators begin to open their shows to an undifferentiated public through paid admissions. but also, here and there, irony, humorous gags. and mockery were used to reduce tension and decrease the sophistication of the sacred ritual of showing a collection. Some of the models even appeared less canonical, less unreal, closer to ordinary standards. Fashion was emerging, however timidly, from the grandiose era of self-infatuation. As long as haute couture kept the prestige of luxury clothing intact, as long as the assertion of hierarchical rank enjoyed de facto primacy over individual self-assertion, fashion remained at least partially dependent on a holistic social code. As soon as that primacy was discredited, not only aesthetically but socially. fashion completed its entry into a new phase governed wholly by the logic of individualism. Clothing was less and less a sign of social respectability. A new relation to the other appeared in which seduction prevailed over social representation.“People don't want to be elegant anymore; they want to be seductive."1+ The important thing was not to follow the latest fashion dictates as closely as possible; what counted was to valorize oneself, to please, astonish, disturb, and look youthful. In youthful styles, a new principle of social imitation has gained currency. It has become less a matter of striving to present an image of one's social position or aspirations than to appear “in the know." Few people now seek to display their “success" through their clothes; but there are fewer still who do not make some effort to present a youthful and liberated self-image, not necessarily by adopting the latest thing in junior fashions, but by capturing the allure of youthfulness, the youthful gestalt. Even adults and the elderly have taken up sportswear, jeans, amusing T-shirts, sneakers, and the braless look. With the advance of youthful styles, mimesis has become democratic; it has shed its fascination with the aristocratic model that had prevailed through the ages. The exaltation of the youthful look is a new focal point for social imitation, inseparable from the modern democratic individualist age whose logic it carries to its narcissistic conclusion. All individuals are in fact urged to work on their own personal iinages, to adapt, to keep fit, to recycle themselves. The cult of youth and the cult of the body go hand in hand; they require the same constant selfscrutiny, the same narcissistic self-surveillance, the same need for information, and the same adaptation to novelty: "At forty. vou become more serene, more yourself, and also more demanding. Your skin changes too. It needs special attention now; it needs appropriate care. . . . The time has come for you to adopt Lancaster's Hyperactive Treatments, specially designed to give your skin a more youthful look." An incontestable agent of social normalization and incitation to fashion, the imperative to appear youthful is also very much a vector of individualization: people owe it to themselves to pay closer attention to themselves. The code of youthfulness contributes even more strikingly, in its wav. to the pursuit of equality between the sexes. Under this code. men take better care of themselves, are more open to the novelties of fashion. care more about the way they look; in the process, they enter the narcissistic cycle that was once perceived as feminine. "Yves Saint-Laurent for Men. An elegant, masculine man, a man who cares how he feels. how he looks. He takes special care of his face, with a cleansing face cream and a moisturizing face cream, followed by the whole gamut of perfumed lotions." Men now spend nearly as much time as women caring for their bodies and looking after their appearance: a survey shows that while women are still ahead, the gap amounts to only about ten minutes a day. over an average of nine hours a week. And the most significant gap occurs not between women and men but between older men (twelve minutes thirty-five seconds a day) and male students (six minutes twenty seconds). ln an astonishing reversal, in France older men now devote more time to personal care than older women.15 Men and women have ceased to behave as opposites in the realm of personal care and appearance; the phase of maximal disjunction between the sexes has given way to a narcissistic democratization, in particular owing to the imperative of youthfulness. ## Fashion in the Plural The end of the hundred years' fashion coincided not only with the collapse of haute couture's hegemony, but also with the appearance of new centers of creativity and with the simultaneous proliferation and lack of coordination of fashion criteria. The earlier system had been characterized by a strong homogeneity of taste: the existence of relatively uniform annual trends could be attributed to the role and the preeminence of haute couture. The legendary hatreds and rivalries among the great couturiers, who all had their own recognizable styles, must not be allowed to obscure the profound consensus that governed fashion's operation throughout the entire period. Haute couture imposed a common aesthetic of grace; following its dictates. women were to dress becomingly, with delicacy and care, engaged in a common quest for "high class" and feminine charm. All aspired to be supreme embodiments of luxurious elegance and refined chic, valorizing a precious and ideal femininity. During the 196os and 197os, this aesthetic consensus was shattered by the rise of sportswear, marginal youthful fashions. and ready-to-wear creations: the homogeneity of the hundred vears' fashion gave wav to a patchwork of disparate styles. The process is most obvious at the level of seasonal creation: no doubt some similarities in shoulder width or hemline could still be found, here and there. in the seasonal collections, but what were once imperatives had become inessential options. treated freely according to the item and the whim of the designer. The phenomenon of seasonal trends, so noteworthy in the earlier phase. was undergoing a gentle meltdown. The hundred vears' fashion had freed couturiers to be creative; nevertheless, their creativity was hemmed in by trade criteria and “perfectionism," aesthetic principles of distinction: thev all had to follow the same lines. A further step was taken when fashion professionals achieved creative autonomy. We have now reached the age of proliferation and fragmentation of the canons of appearance. the juxtaposition of the most disparate styles. Modernism (Courrèges) and sexiness (Alaia) are both legitimate, as are layered styles and close-fitting styles. short styles and long styles, the classically elegant look (Chanel) and the Hollywood vamp look (Mugler), ascetic monasticism (Rei Kawakubo) and the "monumental" woman (Montana), the "down-and-out" look (Comme des Garçons, World's End) and the refined look (Saint-Laurent. Lagerfeld), ironic mixtures of styles (Gaultier) and the "Japanese look" (Mivake, Yamamoto), vivid exotic colors (Kenzo) and dusty earth tones. Nothing is taboo any longer; all styles are accepted and exploited unsystematically. There is no longer a fashion, there are fashions. This is the ultimate stage in the process of personalization of fashion that was started early on by haute couture but restrained by the dominant values of luxury and class refinement. A new era in the individualization of fashion has arrived, characterized by the new values of humanity, youthfulness, cosmopolitanism, casualness, and the appearance of poverty. Fashion erupts in unique and incomparable collections; designers all pursue their own paths by advancing their own particular criteria. In this way, fashion has come closer to sharing the logic of modern art, with its multidirectional experimentation, its absence of common aesthetic rules The rule in fashion now, as in art, is one of free, untrammeled creation. Just as, in the contemporary theater, directors feel free to appropriate the official repertory and transgress it, abolishing the authority of the text and of any principles extrinsic to creation for the stage, designers have done away with the implicit reference to universal taste and have reinvested ironically and anarchically in styles from the past. The theater of texts has given way to a theater of images, intensities, and poetic shocks: fashion for its part, has turned its back on discreet parades in haute couture salons in favor of the “podium effect," sound-and-light shows. the spectacle of astonishment. As Rei Kawakubo writes, "fashion has no reality except in stimulation."16 Even the private collections are no longer governed by the unity of style. positioning, and length that was so clearly apparent in the New Look. in Dior's A or Y lines, and in Saint-Laurent's trapeze line. Thus Kenzo characterizes his own style as consisting of four recurrent looks: first. the wide blouses that double as minidresses; next, the feminine. sweet, high-necked "Victorian" fashion; then there is the "doll" look. amusing. pretty. and gay; and finally, the “boyish" look, sporting and masculine. According to Kenzo, each of his collections is based on these four looks. Eclecticism is the supreme stage of creative freedom. Short skirts no longer exclude long ones; designers can play at will with shapes, lengths. and widths. "External" unity is no more required in a collection than it is in a contemporary stage setting, with its multiple, nested "readings." its references to all periods and contexts, its heterogeneous "collages." The principle established by Dior according to which collections have themes no doubt remains intact, but the themes now serve only as motifs for free or metaphorical inspiration; they no longer function as exclusive formal rules. Nothing counts but the spirit of the colleetions, the poetie value of the label, the wide-open field available to artistic creativity. The fragmentation of the fashion system still holds despite the emergence of the historically unprecedented phenomenon of youthful, marginal styles based on criteria unknown to professional fashion. After the Second World War, the first minority youth fashions appeared ("zazous, Saint-Germain-des-Prés, beatniks): these early "antifashions" took on new scope and meaning in the 196os. With later trends—hippie, "baba, punk, new wave, Rasta, ska, skinhead—the codes proliferated by way of the anticonformist youth culture, which had multiple manifestations in dress and appearance and also in values, tastes, and behavior. The exacerbated nonconformity of this youth culture had its roots not only in strategies of differentiation with respect to the world of adults and other youth. but also, more profoundly, in the development of mass hedonistic values and in young people's desire for emancipation in connection with the progress of the democratic individualist ideal. Historically speaking, what matters most is that the impetus for these trends came from outside the bureaucratic system that characterizes modern fashion. Certain segments of civil society thus seized the initiative in the realm of appearance; they attained a degree of autonomy that revealed an astonishing social creativity in the area of fashion, a creativity that was a major source of inspiration for professional designers as they renewed the spirit of their collections. The youthful fashions stamped personal appearance with a strongly individualist character. triggering a wave of something like a neodandyism that consecrated the extreme importance of appearance. Neodandies set thenmselves radically apart from the ordinary; they play on provocation. excess. and eccentricity in order to displease, surprise, or shock. As with classical dandyism. what is at stake here is increasing distance, separating oneself from the herd. provoking astonishment, cultivating personal originality. There is just one difference: with neodandyism it is no longer a matter of displeasing in order to please, of seeking social recognition by wav of scandal or the unexpected; rather, neodandies seek to make the most drastic break possible with dominant codes of taste and appropriateness. The reserved. sober costume of a Brummell, the high-life quest for refinement and nuance in the choice of tie or gloves—such manifestations are over and done with. Neodandyism functions by means of outrageous marginality. exoticism and folklore (hippies), the blurring of distinctions between the sexes (long hair for men). Neodandies let themselves go, exaggerating ugliness and repulsiveness (punk) or ethnic self-assertion (Rasta, Afro). Personal appearance is no longer an aesthetic sign of supreme distinction. a mark of individual excellence; it has become a comprehensive svmbol designating an age group, existential values, a life-style independent of social class, a culture at a breaking point, a form of social challenge. Through their excesses, these fashions undoubtedly entail a break with ordinary appearance; nevertheless, in one sense they merely announce and accompany—however spectacularly—a general tendency to want to be less dependent on the official dictates of fashion. These youthful fashions have to be viewed less as absolute deviations than as mirrors of a wave of generalized individualization of fashion behavior characteristic of a new age of personal appearance. The expression “antifashion" has been used in this connection, but the term is not entirely satisfactory. To be sure, norms openly hostile to those of the official canon have found social expression; however, far from destroying the principle of fashion, they have simply made its overall architecture more complex and more diverse. The new era of fashion entails the combining of absolutely incompatible criteria, the coexistence of professional parameters and "wild" criteria, the disappearance of a legitimate standard imposed on the entire social edifice. We have reached the end of the consensual age of appearances. Thus fashion can no longer be defined as a system ruled by an accumulation of small nuances, since radically dissident codes that can lay claim even to ugliness are juxtaposed with the system of countless small differentiating details of elegance. On the one hand, there are fewer and fewer clear-cut divergences in clothing styles from class to class and between the sexes; on the other hand. extreme dissimilarities are returning, in particular in the minority fashions of young people and in those of the “adventurous" stylists. Unlike avantgarde art, contemporary fashion is not running out of steam: its horizons are not bounded by either homogeneity or repetitiveness. Obligatory trends are behind us, while canons of elegance have proliferated and youthful styles have emerged; the fashion system has unquestionably moved beyond the normative, uniform cycle that. in spite of the process of aesthetic diversification unleashed by haute couture. continued to link the hundred years' fashion with the age of the fashion trades. With its polymorphous fragmentation, the new fashion system turns out to be fully compatible with the "open society" that is more or less universally instituting the reign of à la carte formulas, flexible rules. overabundant choice, and generalized self-service. The controlling imperative of seasonal trends has yielded to the juxtaposition of styles: the injunetive and uniform mechanism of the hundred years' fashion has given way to an optional and playful logic in which one chooses not only among different clothing designs, but among the most incompatible principles of appearance. This is open fashion, the second phase of modern fashion, with its heteromorphic codes, its nondirectivity, its supreme ideal known in France as le look. Running counter to all aligned fashions. including the antiseptic preppie code and the code of casualness. the "in" look of the 198os encourages the sophistication of appearances, the free invention and alteration of one's self-image; it reintroduces artifice. plav. and singularity.17 All the same, there is no reason to speak of a Copernican revolution in looks.18 In reality, the age of le look is nothing but the end point of the individualist dynamic that has been consubstantial with fashion from its earliest moments; it only carries to the extreme the taste for singularity, theatricality, and difference that the earlier eras also manifested, even though clearly in quite different ways and within much narrower limits. From Henri Ill's mignons to the nineteenth-century dandies, from the lionnes to the tastemakers of contemporary fashion, anticonformism, fantasy. and the desire to be noticed have not lacked practitioners at the higher levels of society. Le look constitutes less a break with this age-old individualist "tradition" than an exacerbation of it. Everyone is invited, now, to decompartmentalize styles, to blend them, to do away with stereotypes and copies, to abandon rules and fossilized conventions. In this respect the hedonistic and hyperindividualist ethic generated by the latest developments in consumer society is registered in the world of fashion. Le look, intoxicated with artifice and the spectacular, with individual creation, is a response to a society in which the primordial cultural values are pleasure and individual freedom. What is valued is the deviation, the creative personality, the astonishing image, rather than, as before, the perfection of a design. Linked to the rise of pop psychology, to the desire for increased independence and self-expression, le look represents the theatrical face of the neonarcissism that is allergic to standardized imperatives and homogeneous rules. On the one hand, the contemporary Narcissus is in search of interiority. authenticity, psychic intimacy; on the other hand he tends to rehabilitate the spectacle of self, playful and out-of-phase exhi bitionism. the celebration of appearances. With le look, fashion is becoming young again: it has only to play with the ephemeral, to erupt without complexes in the ecstasy of its own freely invented and freely renewed image. It enjoys the pleasures of metamorphosis in the spiral of fanciful personalization. in the baroque play of individualist overdifferentiation, in the artificialist spectacle of the self offered to the gaze of the other. ## Masculine/Feminine The hundred years' fashion relied on a pronounced opposition between the sexes in terms of personal appearance, backed up by a production system in which fashion creation for women obeyed different imperatives from creation for men. In this system, the feminine pole embodied the changeable essence of fashion in all its glory. Since the i96os, various transformations of unequal importance have altered this age-old distribution of masculine and feminine roles. On the organizational level, for example, in the early i96os, the feminine sanctuary of haute couture invaded the masculine sector. Certain creators and designers for their part now produce avant-garde men's ready-to-wear lines. Although some collections feature male and female models indiscriminately, the most prestigious haute couture labels have launched advertising campaigns for toilet water and beauty products for men. After a long period of exclusion, marked by the conservative dark suit, men are “back in style." But the real novelty lies chiefly in the extraordinary development of sportswear. With mass leisure apparel, men's clothing has made its authentic entrance into the cycle of fashion, marked by frequent changes compulsory originality, and playfulness. Moving away from austere stiffness and dark or neutral colors, men's clothing has taken a step in the direction of women's fashion by integrating fantasy as one of its basic parameters. Bright, cheerful colors are no longer inappropriate: underwear, shirts, jackets, and tennis attire all now allow a free play of color in multiple combinations. T-shirts and sweatshirts display amusing texts and drawings; features that are comic, childlike, or unserious are no longer off-limits to men. "Life is too short to dress drably": while signs of death are vanishing from the public arena, the clothing of both sexes is attuned to the mass happiness characteristic of consumer society. The disjunction between the sexes that characterized the hundred years' fashion has been replaced by a gradual reduction of the gap in dress styles. This process can be observed on the one hand in the at least partial inclusion of men's clothing in the euphoric logic of fashion, and on the other hand in women's increasingly widespread adoption, since the 196cs. of men's clothing styles (pants, jeans, jackets, tuxedos, ties, boots). The emphatic and obligatory dichotomy in personal appearance between the sexes is being blurred; we see equality of conditions progressing as it ends the female monopoly of fashion and partially "masculinizes" the feminine wardrobe. This development certainly does not mean that fashion no longer has its privileged locus in the feminine sphere. Even if haute couture and the designers do present collections for men. the women's collections are the ones that continue to make certain houses and designers famous, and they are the ones that are discussed and advertised, for the most part. in fashion magazines. Creators like Jean-Paul Gaultier have made efforts to speed up the promotion of the "male object" by creating an avant-garde male fashion with no holds barred; however, this fashion remains highly circumscribed, or at all events less varied, less spectacular. than women's fashion. In men's attire, two antithetical logics coexist: the fashion of sportswear and the "nonfashion" of the classic costume. fanciful dress for leisure time and the sober, conservative suit and tie for work. Such a dissociation does not occur as such in women's wear, where fanciful fashion enjoys much wider social legitimacy. 'The opposition that, in France at least. governs feminine fashion operates less between leisure dress and work clothes than between daytime wear, which is more or less "practical," and evening attire, which is more dressed-up or elaborate. If men's attire can be seen as precisely embodying the opposition between hedonistie values and technocratic values that characterizes capitalist societies, for French women the privilege of fashion sets aside that disjunction in favor of a permanent right to frivolity, even though in the workplace that right is undeniably somewhat muted. Men's clothing has become less austere, while women's clothing shows increasing signs of masculine origin; still, these phenomena do not justify a diagnosis of uniformity in fashion, or the eventual disappearance of gender-linked fashions. Men may have long hair; many women wear clothing that originates in masculine styles: there are unisex garments and unisex stores; but all this is far from sufficient to support the idea of a final unification of fashion. What are we seeing, then? Unquestionably, a gradual reduction of the emphatic difference between masculine and feminine forms, a movement that is essentially democratic in nature. But the process of "equalization" in clothing quickly betrays its limits. It is not pursued to the very end. to the complete abolition of all difference; its culmination is not—as one might logically expect, extrapolating from the egalitarian dvnamic——a radical unisex identity. While women are turning in vast nunbers to masculine clothing styles and men are reappropriating their right to a certain level of fantasy in dress, new distinctions are arising that reconstitute the cultural cleavage in the realm of appearance. Homogenization of men's and women's fashion exists only at the level of the superficial survey: in reality. fashion has not stopped incorporating differentiating signs—which may be minor without being inessential——into a system in which it is precisely the "little nothing that makes all the difference." Just as an item of clothing may be out of fashion, may please or displease depending on some minimal nuance, so a single detail can suffice to discriminate between the sexes. Examples abound: men and women alike wear pants. but the cuts and often the colors are different; shoes have nothing in common: a woman's shirt is easy to tell from a man's; the shapes of bathing suits differ. and so do those of underwear, belts, pocketbooks. watches. and umbrellas. More or less everywhere, fashion articles reinscribe difference in appearance by way of "little nothings." That is why short hairstyles. pants. suit coats, and boots have never succeeded in desexualizing women: these features are always adapted to the specificity of the feminine. reinterpreted for women in view of their difference. If clear-cut class distinctions in appearance are being lost, the division between the sexes remains, except perhaps for certain categories of adolescents and voung people who wear more frankly androgynous clothing. But as these cohorts age, the masculine/feminine distribution tends to reassert itself. The representation of gender difference is proving much sturdier than the representation of social class. The marking of social identity by way of clothing has been blurred. but not that of sexual identity, although it is true that sexual dimorphism no longer has the pronounced character it manifested in the hundred years' fashion. The originality of the process that is under way lies precisely here: the progressive, undeniable tendency toward the reduction of extremes does not culminate in the unification of appearances, but in a subtle differentiation, something like the minimal distinctive opposition between the sexes. Differences of appearance between the sexes are becoming less blatant, but with the reduction of distance, discreet oppositions are coming to light. It would be a serious mistake to view the horizon of the democratic movement as one of sexual indistinction or nondifferentiation. The democratization of fashion functions by way of the interminable reproduction of small disjunctive oppositions, of coded differentiations that may be minor or optional but are nevertheless intended to designate gender identity and to eroticize the body. The process of minimal differentiation between the sexes is paralleled by a process of obvious differentiation via exclusively feminine markers such as dresses, skirts, women's suits, stockings, pumps, makeup, depilatories, and so on. The variable geometry of fashion now permits a system of major oppositions to coexist with a system of minor ones: that dual logic is what characterizes open fashion, rather than the alleged generalization of unisex trends whose sphere, strictly speaking. remains circumscribed and whose elements are often associated in one way or another with sexlinked signs. There is no cause for alarm: the end point of the democratic age is not androgyny. With its juxtaposed codes of major and minor differentiation, the separation of the sexes in the realm of dress persists: it has fallen into step with the optional à la carte systems. In the new gender-based constellation of appearance, the positions occupied by women and men are not equivalent: a structural dissymmetry continues to organize the world of fashion. While women can allow themselves to wear virtually anything, can include items of masculine origin in their wardrobe, men for their part are subject to a restrictive code based on the exclusion of feminine emblems. Here is the most important point: under no circumstances may men wear dresses or skirts. or use makeup. Behind the liberalization of mores and the destandardization of roles. an intangible prohibition still continues to organize the system of appearances at the deepest levels with a power of subjective internalization and social imposition that has few equivalents elsewhere. Dress and makeup are, at least for now, the property of the feminine: they are strictly forbidden to men. Here is proof that fashion is not a system of generalized commutation in which everything is exchanged in the indeterminacy of codes in which all signs are "free to commutate and permutate without limits." 19 Fashion does not eliminate all referential content; it does not send reference points floating off toward equivalence and total commutability. The antinomy between masculine and feminine remains in force as a rigorous structural opposition in which the termns are anything but exchangeable. The taboo that presides over masculine fashion is so integral, it enjoys such a degree of collective legitimacy, that no one would dream of challenging it; it does not give rise to protest movements or serious attempts at rebellion. Only Jean-Paul Gaultier has gone so far as to present skirt-pants for men, but more as a provocative publicity stunt than as a quest for a new male fashion: the endeavor has had no effect on the way men actually dress. lt could not have been otherwise: a skirt worn by a man appears immediately as a "perverse" emblem; the effect is inevitably burlesque and parodic. The masculine appears condemned to play indefinitely at being masculine. Is this a vestigial condition destined to disappear, as the movement toward equality gathers momentum and the values of individual autonomy prevail? Nothing is less certain. It is true that the appearance of both men and women has been considerably altered since the 196os. In addition to women's widespread adoption of pants, men can now wear long hair, bright colors, and earrings. But the movement toward convergence has done nothing to dislodge the underlying taboo that prevails in men's fashion. The inegalitarian logic of fashion remains the rule: the boyish look for women has gained social recognition, but unless men are willing to risk laughter and scorn. they cannot adopt the emblems of femininity. In the West, dresses have been identified with womnen for six hundred years; this age-old factor is not without effect. If dresses are off-limits to men, this is because dresses are culturally associated with femininity and thus, for us, with fashion. whereas since the nineteenth century masculinity has been defined, as least in part. in contradistinction to fashion, to the ephemeral and the superficial. For men to adopt feminine symbols in dress would be to transgress. in the realm of appearance, the very essence of modern masculine identity. We have not reached that point, and no sign of the times leads us to anticipate any shift in that direction. Despite the multiple forms of its democratization. fashion remains essentially inegalitarian, at least where gender is concerned. The masculine pole still occupies the inferior, stable position, as opposed to the free, protean mobility of the feminine pole. The new fashion system. however open it may be, has by no means abandoned all continuity with the previous arrangements; it reintroduces the feminine preeminence of the hundred years'fashion in new ways. Todav. as before. the play of charm and dramatic metamorphosis is offlimits to men. The masculine remains inseparable from a process of individual and social identification that minimizes the principle of artifice and play, in a direct line from the “great renunciation" of the nineteenth century. This continuity on the masculine side corresponds to an even deeper continuity on the feminine side. Since the 196os, to be sure, the female silhouette has undergone a decisive “revolution," with the widespread wearing of pants. Still, however significant this phenomenon may be, it has by no means discredited the traditional female emblems of dress. In 1985, 19.5 million pairs of women's pants were sold; but so were 37 million dresses and skirts. Over a ten-year period, the average rhythm of pants purchases increased (in 1975, women purchased 13 million pairs), but the same is true of skirts and dresses (in 1975, 25 million were sold). Since 198ı, dress sales have weakened, but skirt sales have risen. Dresses and skirts accounted for 13.4 percent of clothing purchases in 1953 and 16 percent in 1984: if large numbers of women have taken to wearing pants, they have by no means abandoned the properly feminine component of their wardrobe. Pants did not gradually replace the archetypical women's attire; they appeared alongside traditional clothing as a supplementary option. The persistence of a specifically feminine wardrobe must not be construed as a vestige destined to disappear, but as the condition of greater and more varied freedom in dress. This is why dresses keep on evolving. despite the gains made by pants. The maintenance of dresses does not signify a return to staking out a minority position for women, but just the opposite: it signifies the aspiration to increased choice and autonomy in clothing. This aspiration devolves directly, of course, from the classical feminine passion for modifying personal appearance, but it also derives from the optional contemporary individualism. At the same time, dresses allow the female body to be valorized in specific ways: it can be rendered ethereal, virtuous. or sexy; legs can be displayed; the attractions of the figure can be emphasized; dresses can facilitate flirtatiousness as well as discretion. If dresses have not been subject to collective disaffection, it is because they belong to an open tradition, one that is endlessly renewed by fashion in answer to women's most fundamental objectives in the realm of appearances: seduction and metamorphosis. The continuity in which women's fashion is inscribed is even more manifest if we consider makeup and other beauty products. Since the end of the First World War, modern societies have experienced a constant increase in the consumption of cosmetics, an extraordinary democratization of beauty products, and an unprecedented vogue for makeup. Lipstick. perfume, cream, blush, eyeshadow, and nail polish are all mass-produced industrially and inexpensively: after thousands of years during which they were luxury items reserved to a tiny elite, they have become popular consumer items used more and more frequently in all classes of society.20 There have been changes, of course, in the market for beauty products. The market currently registers an increased preference for skin-care products as opposed to makeup. But there is still a strong popular demand for makeup bases and products for nails, lips, and eyes. Men's colognes and aftershave lotions are increasingly successful, although in i982 men's products still represented only one billion of the eleven billion francs of French profits from perfume and cosmetics. No matter how much women's preferences may be shifting and the men's segment growing, makeup still remains an exelusively female practice that appeals even to quite young girls; the amount of eye and lip makeup used by this sector has increased over the last several years. Among the host of hedonistic and narcissistie values, makeup has acquired broad social legitimacy; it no longer marks young people as part of a "bad lot," but at the most connotes "poor taste"; young girls who use makeup are subject to no more condemnation than mature women are. On the other hand, the use of eye makeup by men remains marginal. limited to a small number of young people. Naturalness, casualness, and practicality are more and more the rule in fashion, yet makeup is still in continuing demand: here is proof not of the power of the advertising artillery. but of the effectiveness of the timeless valorization of feminine beauty. Women's social emancipation has by no means led the "second sex" to stop using cosmetics; at most, we can see a growing tendency toward discretion in makeup, along with a desire for embellishment on the part of the majority. Beauty products and makeup. like female coquetry itself, have endured. In France. the hyperfeminist moment that denounced women's entrapment by fashion has had only superficial effects; it has not succeeded in overturning the age-old strategies of feminine seductiveness. By the mid-i98cs. denunciation of "woman-as-object” was no longer in style; it no longer had authentic social reverberations. But did it ever? Have we come full circle? In reality. feminine frivolousness does not so much perpetuate a traditional image as it contributes to bringing about a new figure of the feminine in which claiming the right to charm does not preclude claiming the right to work and responsibility. Women have conquered the right to vote. the right to sex. the right to free procreation, the right to a full range of professional activity: at the same time, they have retained the ancestral privilege of coquetry and seductiveness. It is this patchwork that defines the French "adult woman." who is constituted by the juxtaposition of once-contradictory principles. That a woman likes fashion no longer implies that she is submitting to destiny; self-adornment and beautification no longer have anything to do with alienation. It does not make sense to keep on speaking of manipulation or reification when a large majority of women declare that. far from “oppressing" them, the proliferation of cosmetics gives them more independence, more freedom to please whomnever they wish to please. whenever they like and however they like.21 Making themselves beautiful has becomne a way for women to play with the archetvpe of femininity. a form of second-degree frivolousness in which the desire to please and detached self-awareness are juxtaposed. Glamnour has been pried loose from ceremonial rituals; it is celebrated in conscious fantasies that make multiple references and allusions. Through dress and makeup, women play at being vamps, stars, tuned-in trendsetters, "women's women." They reappropriate styles, airs, myths, and epochs at will: seduction has a good time and enjoys its own spectacle without taking itself too seriously. Like messages in consumer society, fashion and seduction have given up their earlier earnestness; from now on they function largely by way of humor, pleasure, and playful spectacles. The persistent disjunction between the sexes has echoes even in the new dominant figure of contemporary individuality that men and women now share, psychological and corporeal narcissism. The new narcissism does entail a blurring of previous gender roles and identities in favor of a vast "unisex" wave of personal autonomy and attention to self, along with hyperattention to the body, health, and personal relationships. But we can see that this destabilization of the gender divide does not entail a straightforward homogeneous narcissism once we take into account the way people relate specifically to aesthetics. Male neonarcissism views the body primarily as an undifferentiated reality, an overall image to be maintained in good health and good shape. Men take little interest in details: few specific areas of the body mobilize aesthetic concern, except for certain inevitably critical areas: facial wrinkles, the "gut," thinning hair. What counts above all for men is conserving the gestalt of a slender, dynamic young body through sports or dieting; male narcissism is more synthetic than analvtic. In contrast, for women the cult of the self is structurally fragmented. A woman's image of her body is rarely global; the analytic gaze predominates over the synthetic. Young women as well as mature women see themselves in “parts." There is ample evidence of this in letters published in women's magazines: “I am sixteen years old. My skin is awful—I have blackheads and pimples all over." "Ive just turned forty. I really don't look my age, except for my upper eyelidsthey're slightly wrinkled, and they make me look sad." "I'm $\mathrm { 5 ^ { ' 2 } } ^ { \prime \prime }$ and I weigh 108 pounds. but my hips and stomach are too big." All zones of the female body count: analytic narcissism breaks down the face and body into distinct elements. each endowed with a more or less positive value: nose, eyes, lips. skin, shoulders, breasts, hips, buttocks, and legs are all objects of self-evaluation. a self-surveillance that entails specific personal practices designed to enhance or correct a given body part. This analytic narcissism is essentially rooted in the preponderant force of the code of feminine beauty. The value placed on women's beauty sets off an inevitable process of comparison among women, a careful scrutiny of one's own physique in relation to the recognized canons, an evaluation of all body parts with nothing left out. If fashion in dress is now polymorphous, if its norms have a much less restrictive character, the celebration of female physical beauty. in contrast, has lost none of its power. lt has even been reinforced, generalized, and universalized, along with the desire for a youthful appearance, the parallel development of casual clothes, beach attire, and sportswear, and the proliferation of stars and pinups on display in the media. "Fat is beautiful!" "Ugly is beautiful!" Such are the new watchwords of minority demands, the ultimate democratic avatars of the quest for personality. So be it; but who actually makes such claims? Who believes them? The chances that such voices will move bevond the stage of dissident symptom look virtually nil when we see the depth of the phobia against gaining weight, the growing success of cosmetic products, of weight-loss techniques and diets: the passionate desire to be beautiful remains widespread. Men are unquestionably more preoccupied now than they once were with their waistlines, their skin, their appearance: this transformation, among others, serves to confirm the hypothesis of male neonarcissism. But the ideal of beauty does not have the same impact on men as it does on women. It has different implications for the relation to the body, different functions in individual self-identification, and different social and personal valorizations. The exaltation of feminine beauty reinstitutes a major division between the sexes at the very heart of mobile and "transsexual" narcissism, a division that is not merely aesthetic but also cultural and psychological. There is a dissymmetry between masculine and feminine appearance. We need to take another look at the dichotomy, which may be optional and imprecise but which remains enigmatic in relation to the historical thrust of modern democracies. The social meaning of equality has undermined the idea that human beings are fundamentally heterogeneous. The principle of equality is at the root of the representation of the sovereignty of the people and of universal suffrage; it has contributed to the emancipation of women. to the destabilization of roles, statuses, and identities. However. it has not succeeded in uprooting the “will" of both sexes to manifest their differences by superficial signs. Even as the most obvious svmbols of the division between the sexes are weakening (with the emergence of a feminine fashion that has room for straight lines, short hair, and trousers), others are arising, countering the democratic tendency to bring extremes closer together: examples include the demand for lipstick after the First World War. for nail polish after 193o, for eye makeup starting in the 195os. It is as if the principle of equality had come up against a threshold, as if the democratic ideal had come into conflict with the imperative of gender differentiation. Here we encounter one of the historical limits of the idea of equality of conditions and its progressive reduction of substantive forms of human difference.22 We all recognize ourselves as having a common nature, and we all claim the same rights; yet we do not want to look like members of the opposite sex. Tocqueville wrote that “in democratic ages even those who are not alike are bent on becoming so and copy each other."23 Where gender-related fashion is concerned, that statement is clearly unacceptable: when women wear pants, they are not seeking to resemble men, they are attempting to offer a different image of women, freer in their movements, sexier or more casual—not mimicry of the other, but reaffirmation of a more subtle difference accentuated by the particular cut of clothes or the signs conveyed by makeup. Yet the persistence of a gender-based disjunction in appearance marks something like a failure of the egalitarian dynamic, which cannot succeed in taking the final steps toward eliminating difference. This stubborn resistance to the trend toward equality betrays the power of an ancient antinomic social principle, the sacralization of feminine beauty. Ever since the days of the ancient Egyptians and Greeks, among whom the aesthetic use of makeup is attested, women have presumably always used beauty products as part of their toilette, although proportions have varied. Makeup becomes a ritual women use to make themselves more beautiful, to be desirable and charming, even though beauty products have been regularly subject to denigration and disapproval. What is astonishing is that despite the endless religious and moral denunciations that the use of cosmetics has elicited for thousands of vears. their use has continued to be valorized and practiced by women. not only by courtesans and older women but by the female population at large. Neither the misogyny of mores nor the Christian dogma of sin has kept women from being coquettish, from seeking to appear beautiful and pleasing. By what miracle could equality succeed in putting an end to such a durable phenome non that nothing else has managed to interrupt? Why would women give up the timeless rituals of seduction, when from the Middle Ages and the Renaissance on feminine beauty has found itself increasingly rehabilitated and exalted? With the cult of feminine beauty and the repudiation of the image of woman as Satan, women's desire to embellish themselves. to please, takes on profound social legitimacy. By this token, modern societies rest not only on the principle of equality among human beings. but also on the inegalitarian principle of the "fair sex": beauty remains an attribute, a specific feminine value: it is admired. encouraged. and displayed in ample proportions by women, and not very much by men. The democratic movement of societies seems powerless to block this calling to please, this inegalitarian celebration of feminine beauty as well as the ancestral means for enhancing it. In modern societies. we have even witnessed a reinforcement of the prestige and the requirement of feminine beauty, with the cult of stars and pinups, the importance of sex appeal. the mass production of cosmeties. the proliferation of beauty institutes and magazines offering aesthetie advice, the national and international beauty contests that sprang up after the First World War. The persistent inequality in the means of seduction and in the appearance of the sexes stems essentially from this unequal valorization of the feminine aesthetic. A culture of the "fair sex" could hardly avoid seeking to put beauty in the foreground. along with specifie fashions intended to valorize the female body and face. ls this a stage on the way to the definitive triumph of equality in appearance? If we note the prosperity of the cosmetics industry along with recent developments in fashion and advertising images, we find nothing to justify an affirmative response. On the contrary, there is every reason to imagine the perpetuation of a system characterized by two antithetical systems of logic, egalitarian and inegalitarian, allowing for greater personalization of feminine appearance in keeping with the hyperindividualist values of our time. To be sure, the principle of equality is working to wipe out differences, but the ideal of individuality is working to reinscribe them: the code of the "fair sex," which specifically helps produce difference and valorize aesthetic individuality, still has some good days ahead. While the ideal of equality will undoubtedly continue to move the two sexes closer together in appearance, the sacralization of feminine beauty, for its part, will have the effect of reproducing new differentiations in fashion and seduction rituals. The limit encountered by the egalitarian dynamic extends beyond the sphere of fashion, for it involves the subjective representation of the ego. In the modern era, the essential similarity of women and men is recognized, certainly. by both sexes—so long as we add, paradoxically, that this essential likeness does not preclude a feeling of anthropological otherness. It is not true that owing to the principle of equality sexual identities have been marginalized. relegated to the background in relation to a fundamental substantive identity. Ideologically, we might say, we are alike; but intimately and psvchologically we all immediately identify with our own sex: we see ourselves first of all in our difference as men or women. This is not a superficial phenomenon, even in the context of the immense disruption provoked by the democratic social order: what is at stake here is the very image of the self. of one's own identity, one's most intimate reference points in relation to others. to one's own body and one's own desires. The undoing of social alterity by democratic equality is stymied in this instance. to such an extent that one can doubt the real power of the egalitarian ideal to penetrate the depths of subjective existence. May we not see contemporary feminism and its specific demands, the explosion of feminine writing. the countless speeches and statements made by women, as social symptoms of this limit to equality? The distinctive feature of equality is not that it puts a profound ideological identity tidily in place, it is that it engenders an essential similarity between the sexes that is nevertheless accompanied by a personal feeling of difference. We are alike and not alike. indissociablv. and we cannot tell where the anthropological difference lies: we cannot fix the dividing line cleanly. Such is the astonishing outcome of the equality that destines us not to likeness but to indeterminacy, to the intimate juxtaposition of contraries, and to an endless questioning of sexual identity. ## A Fashion for Living While the reference points for legitimate appearance are being fragmented, new individual and collective tastes are emerging that represent a break with what came before. Neonarcissism is the chief characteristic of contemporary personalities. Even though the hundred years' fashion fostered an expansion of the taste for originality and vastly increased the number of available styles of dress, that fashion system developed in a unified, orderly way: it maintained the traditional primacy of overall aesthetic conformity, the classic “despotism" of fashion. Under the rule of haute couture and fashion magazines, annual and seasonal trends were imposed as so many diktats. In order to be fashionable. one had to adopt the latest trends as quickly as possible; one had to change one's wardrobe according to the whims of the great couturiers and up-to-date women. Open fashion marks the end of this uniform, disciplinary "central planning," the end of the unprecedented gap that had come to exist between innovation and diffusion, between the creative avant-garde and consumers. Now the “street" is no longer mesmerized by fashion leaders: it incorporates novelties only selectively and at its own pace. Where appearance is concerned, the public has acquired a heightened power to select and reject, a power that reflects the individualist escalation of the quest for personal autonomy. The miniskirt fad in the mid-r96os was doubtless the first link in this process of becoming autonomous. Here was a fashion that no longer took as a model the classic thirty-year-old woman, but rather a fifteen- to twenty-year-old girl. A rift between "the latest thing" and mass diffusion was becoming inevitable; past a certain age. women rejected miniskirts as clearly not intended for them, as decidedly too unflattering. Manifestations of independence with respect to the latest canons continued to prolif erate: the “maxiskirt" introduced at the end of the 196os did not really catch on, and the most noteworthy innovations of the 197os barely crossed the borders of a very narrow province. Where did one see the very square shoulders introduced in the late 197os by Mugler and Montana? Who wore the multiple layers of the Japanese designers? Today. no new style sueceeds in taking over instantly in the street. Extreme diversity from one creator to another and an increased desire for autonomy among consumers have led to more detached and more relative behavior with respect to flagship fashions. One is more or less aware of the latest look at the beach. but one does not copy it slavishly; one adapts it for oneself. and one may even ignore it altogether in favor of an entirely different style. The situation is paradoxical: whereas avant-garde creations are increasingly spectacular, mass diffusion is increasingly placid. affected only gradually by innovations at the top (broad shoulders began to appear widely some ten years after they were introduced). 'These are the defining characteristies of open fashion: the public has gained a new level of autonomy with respect to fashion trends, while prestigious styles have lost much of their dictatorial power. Thus the propagation of fashion has been curiously slowed down, after a long phase of acceleration and synchronic adoption. The phenomenon is sufficiently unusual in the sphere of fashion to warrant emphasis. Fashion now progresses globally without feverish haste, without any pressure for instant assimilation. Not that fashion is suffering from burnout or any deficit in creativity: the change it has undergone is not so radical. Rather, a double logic has been established, a dual systemn in the world of appearances. On one side, the supply issues forth as precipitously and changeably as ever. On the other side, there is a demand that is no longer dependable; it is "liberated." it no longer falls into line. A cycle has ended: fashion in dress, which for centuries had been the very symbol of rapid changes in adoption and diffusion, has slowed down to cruising speed. Increasing individual autonomy. far from producing increasingly rapid change in tastes and styles. inclines rather to a certain frivolous “wisdom," generates a certain moderating force among consumers. In the new era of slowed-down fashion, the earlier clear-cut opposition between what was outdated and what was in fashion has been undermined. its borders blurred. No doubt there is still such a thing as “the latest thing." but its social perception is less clear, for the latest thing is lost in a plethoric confusion of creators and diversified looks. Most people no longer know just what is in the forefront among novelties. Fashion increasingly resembles a vague set that can be known only imprecisely and from a distance. At the same time, unfashionableness is moving to a less extreme position: even if the notion is not disappearing, it has become less clear: it is less hastily attributed, and conveys less ridicule. When all lengths and widths are possible, when multitudes of styles go side by side, when vintage clothing is in style. when looking old-fashioned might be the height of fashion. it becomes difficult indeed to be categorically unfashionable. In fashion's new configuration, the new no longer abruptly discredits the old: the drastic injunctions of fashion are fading away as the values of popular psychology, communication, and humor take over. Despite its widespread democratization, the hundred years' fashion still functioned as a massive exclusionary system. That time is past; fashion's "dictatorship" is over, along with the social rejection of unfashionableness. Fashion's new configuration is open, uncompartmentalized, and nondirective. By doing away with the guilt and scorn that had been attached to unfashionableness, the democratization of fashion has entered its culminating phase. Individuals have gained increased freedom in dress; the social pressure to conform has lost much of its force, its homogeneity, and its durability. Just as people have by and large stopped making fun of the defects of others, so they no longer laugh at outdated clothing. This pacification of fashion reflects and embodies a growing tolerance, an increased gentleness in mores. Flexibility in fashion, a deep aversion to violence and cruelty, a new sensitivity toward animals, an awareness of the importance of listening to others, a comprehensive education, efforts to find peaceful solutions to social conflicts—these are all aspects of the same general process of modern democratic civilization. Hence we have a new systein of fashion "with a human face," in which pretty much anything goes, in which others are judged less and less often in terms of some official standard. Euphoria over le look now occurs against a background of widespread tolerance in matters of dress, a context in which people have become less uptight and less passionate about fashion. To say that the public has become increasingly autonomous in relation to fashion obviously need not imply the disappearance of social codes and mimetic phenomena. Social constraints clearly continue to apply to individuals. However, they are less uniform; they allow greater initiative and freedom of choice. Repetitive declarations that personal autonomy is an illusion of naive, presociological consciousness do little to advance our understanding of what is changing in the modern world. It is time to give up the sterile debate between determinism and metaphysical freedom. If it is clear that individual independence, in the absolute. is a myth. it does not follow that individuals living in society do not enjoy varying degrees of autonomy. Even if social obligations quite clearly persist. even if numerous codes and models structure the presentation of the self. private individuals have much broader latitude now than before. There is no longer just one single standard for acceptable appearance: people can choose among multiple aesthetic models. Women continue to be attentive to fashion, but in a different way; they follow it less faithfully. less scrupulously. more freely. The controlled mimicry characteristic of the hundred years fashion has given way to an optional. flexible mimicry. One imitates the model of one's choice, in whatever style one prefers. Fashion is no longer injunctive; instead, it incites, suggests, hints. In the era of accomplished individualism, le look functions à la carte, in terms of mobility and nondirective mimeticism. At the same time, fashion no longer arouses the interest or passion it used to elicit. How could it, when such a broad tolerance rules in matter of dress, when the most heterogeneous styles coexist, when fashion is no longer uniform? In an era when inereasing numbers of women have professional ambitions and activities, when their intellectual. cultural, and recreational interests are similar or identical to those of men, interest in fashion is no doubt more widespread but also less intense, less vital, than in aristocratie periods when the play of appearances had crucial significance for human lives. Narcissistic individualism leads to a relaxation of concern with fashion. 'The moments of enchanted ecstasy (the New Look) and scandalized indignation (the Boyish Look) that punctuated the hundred years' fashion are behind us. No novelty quite manages to provoke that sort of collective emotion now; nothing shocks people any longer, or sets off massive controversies. Since the Courrèges revolution—probably the last fashion event that entailed a certain degree of effervescence—fashion has been running its course in a climate in which indifference is combined with admiration in equal proportions, notwithstanding the abundant media coverage offered by the specialized press. Nevertheless, fashion is successfully pursuing its own creative dynamnics. Collections by such creators as Montana, Mugler. Gaultier, or Rei Kawakubo have seriously disrupted the image of elegance and the feminine archetype, although not enough to reinvigorate the social reception of fashion. Even truly spectacular novelties no longer succeed in seriously jarring the public at large: they scarcely reach beyond the circle of initiates. It is as if in the course of only a couple of decades fashion has lost its power to inspire and irritate the masses. Fashion still arouses interest, it is still attractive, but from a distance: it no longer has unbridled magnetism. “Cool" logic has taken over the space of fashion as it has taken over the ideological space and the political scene. Fashion has entered the relatively dispassionate era of consumption, of casual and amused curiosity. The way people relate to issues of dress has undergone noteworthy changes as well. For more than thirty years, in the developed Western countries. the proportion of family budgets devoted to clothing has been constantly declining. In France. it fell from 16 percent in 1949 to 12 percent in 1959 and 8.? percent in 1974. In 1972, 9.7 percent of the average household budget went for articles of clothing; in 1984, the figure was only 7.3 percent. The decline has not been uniform, of course, and it has more significance for low-income groups than for the well-to-do; the reduction in the percentage of income spent on dress during this period is highest in the case of blue-collar workers and people not in the work force. At present. while it is not clear whether the figures indicate a major trend or a temporary phenomenon, the proportional disparity in spending on dress among the various socioprofessional groups is increasing. In 1956, workers' households devoted 12.3 percent of their budgets to clothing, as compared to 11.4 percent for those of independent or liberal professionals. In $\mathrm { 1 9 8 4 }$ clothing expenses were down to 6.8 percent of workers' budgets, while independent and liberal professionals spent 9.3 percent. Except for people who are not in the work force, workers now spend less on clothing than anyone else. But even if the decline is unevenly distributed, the overall place allocated for clothing in budgets has gone down by one-third over the past thirty years; all socioprofessional categories have participated in the same downward trend. Clothing accounted for 12.5 percent of the budget for someone in an upper-management position in 1956; in 1984, it represented only 8.7 percent. Salaried employees devoted 13.1 percent of their budgets to dress in 1956, as opposed to 8.4 percent in 1984. Although the social disparities are real, they must not be allowed to obscure the broader underlving phenomenon: the decline in the proportion of budgets devoted to clothing, the diminished consumer attachment to dress. The disappearance of made-to-order clothing, the possibility of buying fashion items at accessible prices in various price ranges, the decline in the relative price of clothing—all these factors contributed to the steady decline in the budget share allotted to clothing, but they do not explain everything. Along with the decline in the clothing category in household expenses came a new distribution of purchasing, a new wardrobe configuration for men and women alike. This new distribution of purchases and the new tastes also helped cut down on consumer investment in clothing. Over a thirty-year period, people have completely reorganized the way they outfit themselves. The most significant trends are. on the one hand, a declining interest in the so-called major items (overcoats, raincoats. men's and women's suits), and on the other hand, an increased interest in minor items, sportswear, and casual clothing. In 1953, men bought suits once every six years. Major articles of outerwear represented 38 percent of men's expenses in 1953, as opposed to 13 percent in $\mathrm { I Q } 8 _ { 4 }$ Sportswear and leisure apparel represented 4 percent of men's purchases in 1953 and 31 percent in $\mathrm { 1 9 8 4 }$ The feninine wardrobe has undergone a similar evolution: wool or fur coats, raincoats, and suits represented 33 percent of women's expenses in 1953, 17 percent in $\mathrm { 1 9 8 _ { + } }$ . On the other hand. the purchase of “middle-range" clothing (sweaters. jackets, sportswear. jeans. pants) went from 9 percent of women's clothing budgets to 30 percent.2+ It may be useful to break down the impact of this trend by socioprofessional category. Surveys of clothing expenditures reveal that workingclass households prefer quantity to quality: their purchases fall chiefly in the inexpensive range, unlike those of more affluent wage earners. who are drawn to more expensive, high-quality clothing. Blue-collar workers do not often wear suits and ties, while managers. company heads, and professionals buy suits, blazers, and dress shirts much more frequently. Wives of company heads and professionals are more apt to buy classie items such as suits, between-season dresses, and high-heeled shoes at full price. while wives of managers and engineers spend more money on the latest trends.25 Still, these differences must not be allowed to obscure the overall movement, the market's tendency toward casualness and practicality as exemplified by sportswear. Even if the way the wardrobe is stocked varies from one social class to another, even if purchases vary in price and quality. in overall terms the taste for casual dress, fanciful clothing, and leisure attire is spreading in every milieu. "Major" items do not sell well, while "minor articles (jackets, pants and leisure clothes, sweatshirts, T-shirts, and so on) are doing better and better. In every age group and in all classes of society, people are more and more inclined to wear casual clothing: sports and leisure outfits, light jackets, and tennis shoes have all become city attire. In $1 ( ) 8 \zeta$ only 1.7 million pairs of women's dress pants were sold, and 12 million pairs of leisure and sports pants. In 1974, women bought 4.5 million pairs of jeans and leisure pants; ten years later, the number had risen to 18 million. Sportswear is gaining ground everywhere. Even so, this trend is clearly not about to abolish either dressier or more classic clothes for the office and for evening wear, or characteristically feminine outfits. The preference for casual clothing is symptomatic of the new age of individualism. The recent flare-up of demands for autonomy in personal and sexual relationships. in sports and at work, has as its counterpart the desire for supple. loose. free clothing that does not impede people's movement and comfort. The vogue for sportswear reflects, in the sphere of dress. the demand for greater personal freedom; this freedom is reflected in fashion, in turn. by casualness, the relaxed look, flexibility, and humorous decorations and inscriptions. Sportswear and the decline of “major items" mark the rise of neonarcissism in fashion. the emergence of a personality more insistent on individual autonomy. less dependent on standards of prestigious display. less concerned with competition and obvious social differentiation in appearance. The notion of "Sunday best" has disappeared. along with fascination with the opulent dress of the upper classes: increasingly. fashionable clothing is losing its role as a mark of excellence and social respectability. It expresses less a position in the social hierarchy than a desire for personality, a cultural orientation, a life-style, an aesthetic outlook. Fashionable clothing has always been a sign of class and an instrument of seduction. Contemporary individualism is the primary force responsible for reducing the dimension of the status symbol in clothing and promoting pleasure, comfort, and freedom. People today seek less to elicit social admiration than to seduce and to be at ease; they are less interested in expressing their social standing than in displaying their aesthetic taste: they are less anxious to signify their class position than to look young and relaxed. In this context. the blue-jeans phenomenon deserves special attention. The rage for jeans among all social classes and all age groups, the success of jeans over the last thirty years, is so considerable that it is not an exaggeration to see blue jeans as one of the most characteristic symbols of taste in fashion in the latter half of the twentieth century. It is true that jeans sales have been dropping steadily since the early 198os: the drop from 8.8 million pairs sold (for women) in 1982 to 5.8 million in 1985 represents a significant decline in favor of corduroy and linen in particular. But denim is already making a comeback: the jeans odyssey is far from over. What is at issue is no longer even a fad, but a style that echoes the most cherished values of contemporary individualism: “Be part of the legend," as a Levi's ad puts it. The impression of uniformity and conformity produced by this sort of clothing has often been stressed. Everybody looks like everybody else: the not-so-young resemble the truly young; girls resemble boys; onlookers cannot always tell people apart. In this view, jeans seem to consecrate the mass standardization of appearances, the negation of individualism in dress. However, this is an illusion that misses what is most specific about the phenomenon. Jeans, like any other fashion, are selected, not imposed by some tradition; in this respect, thev must be linked to the free appreciation of individuals able to adopt them, reject them, or combine them at will with other elements. We can read the massive social propagation of jeans as evidence that fashion always conjugates individualism with conformity; individualism is deployed only through mimeticism. But private individuals are always free to accept or reject the latest fad. to adapt it for themselves, to exercise a personal preference for one brand over another, for different shapes and cuts. We could argue that this amounts to giving individualism short shrift; but to do so would be to dismiss all that jeans have signified, and still signify. in the realm of individual freedom properly speaking. Jeans do not show dirt easily: they can be worn in a wide variety of contexts; they do not require ironing or meticulous cleaning; and they are still useful when they are worn. faded. or even torn. Intrinsically invested with anticonformist connotations. jeans were first adopted by young people who were resisting the conventional norms still in place and who were also opposed to the new hedonistic values of liberal consumer-oriented societies. The rejection of strict conformist codes was immediately exemplified by rock music and casual clothing: all things considered, it is fair to say that the inclination for jeans foreshadowed the counterculture explosion and the general protest movements of the late 196os. As an expression of the desire for a freer, less confining. more flexible private life, jeans were the manifestation of a hvperindividualistic culture based on the cult of the body and the quest for a less theatrical sensuality. Far from serving as a uniform. jeans underline body shapes; they emphasize the hips, buttocks, and legs. Recent Lee Cooper advertisements have exploited this "sexy" register freely: jeans outline the unique aspeets of physical individuality. In place of clothing that dissimulates and exercises its charm with discretion, we find clothing with a more "tactile," more immediately sexual resonance. We have moved bevond represented sensuality toward a more direct, more natural, livelier sensuality. Feminine seductiveness in jeans has hardly been abandoned: it has relinquished its earlier affectation in favor of more emphatic, more provocative, more youthful signs. Jeans illustrate, in seduction and fashion, the eclipse of distance that is at work in modern art, in avant-garde literature, and in rock music. Seduction is separated from the sublimation of artifice; it requires fewer mediations, more immediacy, the democratic signs of stimulation, naturalness, proximity, and equality. With jeans, democratic individualist appearance has taken another step forward: it has become the expression of individuality disengaged from social status. Distinguished and distanced refinement has given way to the ostentation of simplicity. to an extreme equalization of the signs conveyed by dress, to a relaxation of attitudes and postures. A certain unisex ideal has won over the modern world, yet it has not destroyed the sexualization and seductiveness of appearances. By doing away with complicated signs of strategies for charm, sportswear has profoundly altered the register of seduction. Seduction has certainly not disappeared. but there is a new configuration in which pleasure in personal appearance is less alienated by the gaze of others, less dependent on an imperative need to subjugate. The new approach allows the individual to please while remaining at ease: seduction has achieved increased autonomy by privileging comfort, practicality, ease, and rapidity of use. We have entered the era of instant seduction: it is still a matter of exerting charm, but without devoting excessive time to the process, without detracting from other activities. In its relaxed mode, fashion entails an almost imperceptible one-minute seduction. Contemporary fashion does not strive to eliminate seductive strategies; it strives rather, in the daytime, to make them more and more discreet, if not invisible. This temporally minimal seduction coexists quite well, moreover, with the more elaborate rituals used for evening. when women want to dress up in order to please Seduction remains a feminine code, but it becomes more and more a matter of choice and pleasure. In a recent survey, 70 percent of the women respondents felt that maintaining and embellishing one's body was first and foremost a pleasure. Seduction has been recycled: it has been partially reconstituted from the standpoint of neonarcissistic individualism, with the emergence of the à la carte aesthetic and subjective autonomy. The new distribution of wardrobes attests equally well to the upsurge in hedonistic and psvchologizing values characteristic of our societies. A growing number of people prefer to make more frequent purchases rather than to buv expensive items less often; they prefer to buy small articles rather than "major" items: this is a typical expression of the new age of individualism in the realm of dress. With the purchase of small items, not only do we have the opportunity to make more frequent choices, but we give ourselves more frequent pleasure. We may prefer to change often for the sheer pleasure of changing, for the fun of disguising and transforming ourselves, rather than out of a desire for social display. Buying clothes is not a strictly egocentric enterprise, to be sure; it is always linked to the relation to the Other, to the desire for seduction—but seduction brought into line with hedonistic democratic culture. The goal of social standing is giving way to the goal of playful renewal and the pleasure of change. Wardrobe renewals are governed increasingly not only by personal taste, but also by the desire to “create a new you." Many women make no bones about it: they do not buy a given article of clothing because it is in fashion, or because they need it, but because they need a lift, because they are depressed and want to change their mood. By going to the hairdresser or buying something to wear they feel they are "doing something." becoming different, growing younger, getting off to a fresh start. "Make me over": as fashion ceases to be a directive and uniform phenomenon, the purchase of fashion items is not governed by social and aesthetic considerations alone; it has become a therapeutic phenomenon as well. With open fashion and the process by which the social recognition accorded clothing has been reduced, a new regime of imitation in fashion has been inaugurated. For centuries, the diffusion of fashion was by and large achieved with the court and the aristocracy as starting points: the lower classes invariably copied the manners and dress of their betters. Gabriel de Tarde could thus treat the imitation of superiors by inferiors as a law governing the process of social emulation. The hundred years' fashion did not infringe on this law; the models for imitation were those set forth by haute couture and women of high society. But the situation is different today, when casual styles and sportswear are in fashion. when even stars dress “like everyone else." The change that has occurred has radically undermined the age-old law of imitative contagion: one no longer imitates one's betters, one imitates what one sees in the vicinity—simple and amusing outfits, inexpensive models seen with increasing frequency in magazines. The vertical law of imitation has been replaced by a horizontal law. in keeping with a society of individuals recognized as equals. As Tocqueville had already noted on the subject of opinions and beliefs. progress toward democracy leads to majority rule, to the influence of the greatest number. Fashion does not escape this rule. The influence of the "average person is now preponderant: this is attested by the increasing success of "minor" items, leisure clothes, and sportswear. The statistical data on clothes-buying trends over time provide further indications that the diffusion of fashion is less and less subject to the classical schema according to which the lower classes try to catch up with the upper classes. 'The pyramidal model in which new articles are progressively diffused from the upper classes down is no longer generally applicable. The pullover, for example, over a twenty-year period beginning in the early 1950s, was purchased primarily by upper-echelon managers and independent professionals. But its spread did not follow the hierarchical order of social categories. After 1972, white-collar employees surpassed the level of consumption of the higher categories; however, not only did farmers and blue-collar workers fail to follow the white-collar pattern, they gave up pullovers even before the higher categories tired of them. Similarly, the spread of jeans did not follow the rule of hierarchical descent: the wearing of jeans did not start with the upper classes, but was first adopted by the young. In the early 197os, the wives of upper-echelon managers were the leading purchasers of jeans. But in the years that followed, it was not middle managers or independent professionals who spent the most money on jeans, it was the wives of white-collar workers and farmers. 26 Imitation in fashion obeys a complex logic from this point on; it is no longer mechanically ordered according to the principle of social catch-up. More often, an article is adopted not because it is in use at the top of the social pyramid, but because it is new. One dresses fashionably not so much to distinguish oneself from lower orders of society or to display one's own rank as to change, to be modern, to please, to express one's own individuality. To be sure, from the very outset fashion has never been motivated entirely and exclusively by social distinction: the taste for novelty and the desire to manifest aesthetic individuality have always been at work as well. But one can scarcely doubt that the desire for social differentiation was a preponderant and particularly intense motive over the centuries. What we are seeing now is the recomposition of the space of motivations in fashion. The distinctive dimension of class is not disappearing, but it is losing its importance and its impact in favor of the desire for novelty, seduction, and individuality. In our day, the new is loved for itself; it is no longer a class alibi but a value in its own right, one that makes it possible moreover. to display a modern. changing aesthetic individuality. Fashionable clothing is less and less a means for social distancing, more and more an instrument for individual and aesthetic distinction, an instrument of seduction. youthfulness. and emblematic modernity. Ever since it began. fashion has blended conformity with individualism. For all its openness. contemporary fashion still has not escaped that basic structure. But there is a difference: individualism has become by and large less competitive, less concerned with what others think, less exhibitionist. No doubt eccentric voung minorities exist, but they only serve to make the majority's tendencies stand out, the majority being less concerned with originality than with understated elegance, comfort, and casualness. If small numbers of people pile on one extravagance after another, the vast majority manifest increasing discretion. Everything goes, and yet the streets look drab. devoid of originality for the most part; designers' follies are countered by the monotony of everyday appearance. Such are the paradoxes of open fashion. at the very moment when le look and unbridled fantasy are exalted. The privatization of existence, the rise of individualist values, the diversification of ready-to-wear, far from leading, as might have been expected, to a burst of individualist originality, have led to a progressive neutralization of the desire for distinction in dress. In this sense, it is true that there is less individualism than in earlier eras when the frenetic search for social and personal differentiation was a source of rivalry and jealousy, eras when it was imperative to set oneself apart through details, accessories, and nuances, when it was intolerable for two women to be dressed alike. But beyond all this, it is perhaps even more accurate to say that individualism in dress has significantly increased. In our day we dress more for ourselves, more as a function of our own tastes, than in terms of an obligatory, uniforn standard. For centuries, individuals could assert autonomy only in the choice of styles and variants; the overall aesthetic standard was not accessible to the exercise of individual freedom. Today, personal autonomy is manifested even in the choice of criteria of appearance. Individualism is less visible because the concern for originality is less flagrant: in reality, individualism is more fundamental than ever. because it can permeate the very reference points of personal appearance. Individualism in fashion today is less glorious but more free, less decorative but more optional, less ostentatious but more combinatorial, less spectacular but more varied, than ever before.

# Consummate Fashion ## W H HERE does fashion begin and where does it end, in the era of exploding needs and proliferating media, mass advertising and mass leisure, stars and "hits"? What is left that fashion does not rule, at least in part, when the ephemeral governs the world of objects, culture, and meaningful discourse. and when the principle of seduction has profoundly reorganized the everyday environment, news and information, and the political scene? The fashion explosion no longer has an epicenter; it has ceased to be the privilege of a social elite. All classes are caught up in the intoxication of change and fads: the infrastructure and the superstructure alike are subject. although to different degrees. to fashion's rule. We have reached the era of consummate fashion. the extension of the fashion process to broader and broader spheres of collective life. Fashion is not so much a particular peripheral sector. now. as a general form at work in society as a whole. Everyone is more or less immersed in fashion, more or less everywhere, and the triple operation that specifically defines fashion is increasingly implemented: the operation of ephemerality, seduction, and marginal differentiation. Fashion has to be delocalized. It can no longer be identified with the luxury of appearances and superfluity; it has to be identified with the trivalent process that is thoroughly overhauling the profile of our societies. With the extraordinary expansion of this tripolar structure, modern societies have undergone a major shift that radically separates them from the type of society that developed in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. A new generation of bureaucratic and democratic societies has come into being: their dominant tone is lightness and frivolity. The coercive imposition of disciplines has been replaced by socialization through choice and image; revolution has given way to infatuation with meaning. Communication via advertising has replaced ideological solemnity, while the seductiveness of consumption and pop psychology has displaced rigorism. In a few short decades, we have shed the primacy of rigid ideologies and the disciplinary schema characteristic of the heroic stage of democracies; contemporary societies have recycled themselves in kit form and as express service. This does not mean, of course, that we have broken all ties with our roots. Frivolous society does not leave the competitive bureaucratic universe behind; rather, it carries that universe forward into the flexible, communicative stage. Nor does it leave the democratic order behind: it achieves that order in the frenzied passion for the spectacular, in the inconstancy of opinions and social mobilizations. The supremacy of the fashion form must not be mistaken for a form of decadence that would characterize Western societies given over to private pleasures and stripped of all faith in higher ideals. The fashion form has nothing to do with posthistorical “snobbery," the Hegelian-Marxist end of history as Kojève analyzed it in the late 1940s.¹ Consummate fashion does not imply the disappearance of social and political content in favor of a pure, snobbish, formalist gratuitousness lacking in historical negativity. Rather, it implies a new relation to ideals, a new investment of democratic values, and at the same time an acceleration of historical change. a greater collective opening to the challenge of the future, even if this opening comes by way of present pleasures. The end point of fashion entails the fading away of the great prophetic references, the end of the traditional forms of socialization, the permanent circulation of things and meanings. It brings about a decline in social resistance to change, and it mobilizes more consciously historical human beings who are more scrupulous in dealing with the requirements of democracy. There is no cause for alarm: I am by no means purporting to define all Western societies in terms of a homogeneous and unique supersystem. It is perfectly clear that essential aspects of collective life have very little to do with the fashion form. Economic spirals, the escalation in war technology. terrorist attacks, nuclear catastrophes, unemployment, the distribution of labor, xenophobia—widely disparate phenomena such as these lie at the opposite pole from a frivolous image of our time. The euphoria of fashion is certainly not omnipresent: the age of seduction coexists with the arms race, with lack of personal security in daily life. with the economic crisis and the subjective crisis. The point warrants reiteration: postindustrial societies are not unified entities that can be understood solely in the light of the fashion process. Science, technology, art, conflicts of interest. nations, politics, social and humanitarian ideals are based on their own specific criteria and have their own autonomy. The fashion form only encounters them in passing; it can sometimes rearticulate them, but it does not absorb them entirely in its own logic. My aim in this book is not to homogenize disparate entities, but to grasp a dominant historical tendency that is restructuring entire areas of our collective universe. The idea that contemporary societies are being organized under the laws of imperative renewal, planned obsolescence, images, spectacular solicitation, and marginal differentiation has been advanced for a long time, at various levels and with considerable skill, by such writers as David Riesman, Vance Packard. Daniel Boorstin, Herbert Marcuse, and later in France by Jean Baudrillard and the situationalists. Starting in the 1960s, the perception of a “new society," governed, as it were, by the fashion process, was presented by the theoreticians most attentive to modernity; however, their analysis remained confined to the conceptual framework inherited from an earlier, revolutionary mentality. The hegemony of fashion was denounced with a sort of critical overkill, while the denouncers failed to notice that the radical-subversive perspective was itself becoming a fad in use among intellectuals. No theoretical leitmotif can be seen more plainly: the trajectory of fashion in our societies has been identified with the institutionalization of waste. with the large-scale creation of artificial needs, with the standardization and hyperregulation of private life. Consumer society entails the programming of everyday life; it manipulates and regulates individual and social life rationally in all its aspects; everything becomes artifice and illusion in the service of capitalist profit and the dominant classes. In the "swinging sixties," critics went all out to stigmatize the empire of seduction and obsolescence, alleging the rationality of irrationality (Marcuse). the totalitarian organization of appearance and a generalized alienation (Debord). global conditioning (Galbraith), terrorist society (Henri Lefebvre). a fetishist and perverse system leading back to class domination (Baudrillard). The supremacy of fashion has been read in the light of the schema of class struggle and bureaucratic capitalist domination. Behind the ideology of the satisfaction of needs, the conditioning of existence. or "augmented survival," has been denounced (Debord). along with the rationalization and extension of domination. Shored up by the conceptual tools of Marxism, the classic reflex of condemning appearances and seduction has played its hand fully; it has found its ultimate expression at the level of the social body as a whole. The dossier needs to be thoroughly reexamined. In their feverish haste to denounce, these theoreticians have fundamentally misunderstood the historical work of the reign of fashion. Its real long-term effects lie lightyears away from those that critical thinkers and, in many respects, common sense itself have castigated and continue to attack. With total fashion, the ruse of reason is convoked as never before to the podium of history. Behind the scenes of seduction. the Enlightenment is at work; underneath the escalation of the ephemeral, the centuries-old struggle to conquer individual autonomy is under way.

# 