A Century of Fashion Ashion as we understand it today emerged during the latter half of the nineteenth century. Not everything about it was brand-new, of course; far from it. Still. it is clear that an unprecedented system of production and diffusion appeared during that period and was maintained with great consistency for a century. This historical phenomenon is what I want to emphasize here: technological progress and its own endless stylistic reversals or revolutions notwithstanding, fashion has not escaped what might be called a long-term structure. From the mid-nineteenth century to the point in the 196os when the system began to crack and to transform itself to some extent. the organization was so stable that it is legitimate to speak of a fashion that lasted a hundred years. This was the first phase of the history of modern fashion. its sublime, heroic moment. A century of fashion: doubtless this is one way of saying that a cycle has ended, while stressing everything that continues to connect us most deeply to the phase that instituted a durable organization of the ephemeral. Of this hundred years fashion, one might say without exaggeration what Tocqueville said of America:' more than a fashion, it is a metaphor for the advent of modern bureaucratic societies. More than a page in the history of luxury, class distinctions, and rivalries, it is one facet of the ongoing "democratic revolution." ## Fashion and Its Double Modern fashion is articulated around two new industries that might seem to have little in common. Their goals and methods, the articles they produce, and the prestige they earn are undeniably incommensurate; nevertheless, these two industries together form a single configuration, a homogeneous system in the history of the production of ephemera. Haute couture—initially known as couture—on the one hand, industrial clothing manufacture (confection) on the other: these were the two keystones of the century of fashion. The system was bipolar: at one extreme there were luxury items and made-to-order creations, while at the other there were inexpensive, mass-produced, ready-to-wear articles that imitated more or less closely the prestigious “labeled" models of haute couture. The creation of original models coupled with the industrial reproduction of copies: the emerging fashion system was characterized by a marked differentiation in techniques, prices, reputations, and objectives, as befitted a society itself divided into classes with quite distinct life-styles and goals. The system as thus described is only a partial transcription of a more complex historical reality. There have always been intermediate organizations, low-level and middle-level couture, between the two poles. In France in particular, during the period in question, large numbers of women (6o percent in the 195os) continued to use dressmakers or made their own clothes from patterns sold in stores or through fashion magazines. At the same time, especially in the highly industrialized countries (the United States, for example) where haute couture models could be reproduced legally and rapidly, manufacturing was not limited to lowpriced production; manufacturers diversified their offerings and produced articles across a wide quality range, from modest to near luxury. Still, the overall schema can fairly be characterized as one in which haute couture had a monopoly on innovation and set the annual trends: clothing manufacturers and related industries followed along. producing goods inspired more or less directly and more or less immediately by haute couture but in any event offered at very different prices. If modern fashion was undergirded, then, by two principal axes, it nevertheless becane for the first time clearly monocephalic. To the extent that haute couture can be described as an unrivaled laboratory for novelty, the hundred years' fashion was essentially synonymous with feminine fashion. This does not mean that a parallel masculine fashion did not exist; however, the latter was not rooted in any institution comparable to that of haute couture, with its illustrious houses, its seasonal renewals, its parades of fashion models, its bold strokes, and its "revolutions." Compared to couture fashion, masculine fashion could be characterized as slow, moderate, steady, "egalitarian," even if it was also articulated according to the opposition between made-to-order and readyto-wear. Haute couture is without question the most significant institution in modern fashion. No other fashion institution has had to keep on mobilizing a legal arsenal to protect itself against plagiarists and imitators; no other has given rise to passionate debates or enjoyed worldwide fame; no other has benefited from the steady, intense publicity of a specialized press. Extending a phenomenon that was already visible in the eighteenth century, modern fashion is feminine in essence. The two-tiered order of fashion was not structured around an explicit objective; it did not even arise within an entirely synchronous time frame. Industrial manufacturing came before haute couture. Starting in the 182os in France, following England's example, an industry for producing new, inexpensive, ready-to-wear clothing was established; it was flourishing by 1840, even before the age of mechanization inaugurated around 186o with the advent of the sewing machine. As department stores gained a foothold, as technology progressed and production costs were lowered, manufacturers diversified the quality of the goods they offered the lower and middle bourgeoisie. After the First World War, manufacturing was profoundly transformed under the influence of an increased division of labor, improved machinery. breakthroughs in the chemical industry allowing richer colors. and—as of i939—new textiles based on synthetic fibers. But despite this progress, the organization of fashion remained unchanged; uņtil the 196os. all fashion industries were subject to the dictates of haute couture. In the winter of 1857-58. Charles-Frédéric Worth set up his own fashion house in Paris in the rue de la Paix. This was the first in the line of houses that would soon be known as haute couture. Worth advertised“readymade dresses and coats. silk goods, top-notch novelties"; however, his real originality—to which contemporary fashion is still heir—lay in the fact that for the first time brand-new models, prepared in advance and changed frequently. were presented to clients in luxurious salons, then made to measure according to the client's choice. This revolution in the process of creating fashion was accompanied, moreover, by a major innovation in sales technique that was also initiated by Worth: the models were worn and presented by young women, prototypes of today's mannequins or fashion models. known then as sosies, "doubles." Fashion became an enterprise involving not only creativity but also advertising spectacles. In France. dozens of fashion houses sprang up following Worth's example and organized along similar lines. The 19oo World's Fair included twenty houses of haute couture. including Worth, Rouff (established in 1884), Paquin (1891), and Callot Soeurs (1896). Doucet, which later hired Poiret, opened its doors in 188o; Lanvin was founded in 1909, Chanel and Patou in 1919. The 1925 decorative arts show welcomed seventy-two fashion houses; in 1959. some fifty were registered with the Chambre syndicale de la Couture parisienne. These houses, many enjoying illustrious reputations, employed from one hundred to two thousand people, depending on their size and on the year, but their impact on the national economy was clearly out of all proportion to the number of their employees. The luxury industry represented by haute couture came to play a major role in the French economy, above all in clothing exports; owing to the prestige of the great Paris houses, this sector occupied second place in France's external trade in the mid-192os.² During that period, an exceptionally prosperous one to be sure, prior to the Great Depression and its severe impact on high fashion, haute couture accounted single-handedly for one-third of France's export sales in clothing.3 Haute couture sales represented at that point roughly 15 percent of all French exports.† Nevertheless, by the mid-195os the situation had already changed significantly: the House of Dior, which accounted all by itself for more than half the total sum of visible and invisible haute couture exports, represented no more than .5 percent of all France's visible exports. Although it came into being in the mid-nineteenth century, not until the beginning of the twentieth century did haute couture adopt the rhythm of creation and presentation that is familiar today. At the outset there were no collections to be presented at fixed dates, for models were created throughout the vear, varving only according to the season. Nor were there organized fashion shows: these began in 19o8 and 191o and became authentic spectacles, presented at a fixed hour of the afternoon in the great fashion house salons. After the First World War. as foreign professional buvers acquired more and more models, the seasonal shows began to be organized at more or less fixed dates. From then on. twice a vear. in late January and early August, every great fashion house in Paris presented its summer and winter collections; later, in response to pressure by foreign buyers, fall and spring (half-season) collections were presented in April and November. Collections were first shown to foreign agents. especially American and European buyers; private clients were admitted two or three weeks later. The foreign professionals bought models of their own choosing, generally with the right to reproduce them in major lines in their own country. Supplied with models and reference slips that provided the information needed to reproduce the garment, manufacturers—except for those in France, who, for obvious reasons of exclusivity, did not have immediate access to the season's novelties—could reproduce simplified versions of the Parisian creations very rapidly; in just a few weeks, their foreign clients could thus be dressed in the latest haute couture craze at reasonable cost, sometimes even at very little cost, depending on the manufacturing techniques used. As a result, and contrary to widespread belief. the effect of haute couture was not so much to accelerate fashion change as to regularize it. In fact, the tendency to rapid change in fashion did not arrive simultaneously with haute couture but preceded it by more than a century: by the end of the Old Regime in France, fashion had already acquired its frenetic rhythm. But prior to the haute couture period, the rapidity of change in fashion had remained a random phenomenon, driven somewhat chaotically by one variable arbiter of elegance or another. With the age of haute couture, however, renewal in fashion was for the first time institutionalized and orchestrated. Fashion became for the most part a biennial affair: the half-season collections did little more than offer hints of the fashion to come. In place of a fortuitous logic of innovation, we find a normalization of change in fashion, an obligatory renewal brought about at fixed dates by specialized groups. Haute couture brought discipline to fashion at a time when fashion was giving rise to an unprecedented process of innovation and creative fancy. Fashion's decrees originated in Paris. With the hegemony of haute couture, a hypercentralized fashion appeared, entirely indigenous to Paris and yet at the same time international: Parisian fashion was followed by all the "up-to-date" women in the world. In this respect, moreover, fashion bears some resemblance to modern art, for its pioneers were concentrated in Paris and they developed a style from which national characteristics were expunged. The phenomenon is certainly not an entirely new one: from the seventeenth century on, France was increasingly recognized as the beacon of fashion in Europe. Dealings in “fashion dolls," those earliest ambassadors of fashion, became commonplace in the eighteenth century, betraying both the tendency toward uniformity of dress in Europe and the tendency for Paris to serve as the pole of attraction. Nevertheless, throughout this entire period the way people dressed continued to present certain recognizable traits characteristic of their respective countries: like painting, fashion retained a certain national character. Aided by manufacturing. haute couture on the contrary allowed fashion to break loose from the national grip by leaving intact only the model and its many copies, which were identical in all countries. Thus even though it remained subject to the luxurious authority of haute couture, modern fashion stands out as the earliest manifestation of mass consumption: homogeneous, standardized indifferent to frontiers. Under the Parisian aegis of haute couture, fashion approached worldwide uniformity, a homogenization in space with a parallel diversification in time linked to the regular cycles of the seasonal collections. As fashion was centralized and internationalized, it was also democratized. The rise of industrial dressmaking on the one hand and of mass communications on the other, the dynamics of modern life-styles and values, led not only to the disappearance of diverse regional folk costumes but also to the attenuation of heterogeneous class differences in dress: dressing in the fashion of the day become possible for an increasingly broad social spectrum. The most remarkable thing about this whole process is the contribution made by haute couture—a luxury industry par excellence-to the democratization of fashion. From the 192os on, with the simplification of women's clothing that was symbolized, in a way, by Chanel, fashion indeed became less inaccessible because it was easier to imitate: the gap between dress styles inevitably narrowed. As soon as the display of wealth became a sign of poor taste, as soon as true elegance required discretion and the absence of show, women's fashion entered the era of democratic appearances. In 1931, the journalist Janet Flanner noted that Chanel inaugurated the “poor" style, introduced the apache sweater to the Ritz, lent elegance to the housemaid's shirt collar and sleeves, exploited the workman's scarf, and dressed queens in mechanics' overalls. Clear separations continued to set apart the dress styles of the various social strata, but what matters is that it was no longer obligatory for the upper classes to dress with ostentatious luxury. Such dress was legitimate only if it was discreet or even imperceptible; a certain “impersonal" and apparently standardizable siınplicity took over the scene of feminine elegance. “Here is Chanel's Ford": the American edition of Vogue came to that conclusion in i926 about a simple long-sleeved black dress. At the opposite extreme from aristocratic emphasis, the modern democratic style was incarnated in simplified, supple lines, in ostensibly unostentatious uniforms." While the first revolution instituting the look of the modern woman can be traced to Poiret's suppression of the corset in 19o9-10. the second and unquestionably more radical one arrived in the 192os under the impetus of Chanel and Patou. Paul Poiret abandoned the corset and gave feminine allure a new suppleness, but he remained faithful to the taste for elaborate ornamentation, to a traditional sumptuousness in dress. Chanel and Patou on the contrary repudiated the strident look of luxury: they stripped away frills and affectations from women's clothing. Women would henceforth wear simple sheaths, cloche hats. pants, and sweaters. Chanel managed to dress society women in tailored jersey suits and grey. black, or beige pullovers. Patou created sweaters with geometric motifs and straight pleated skirts. From that point on it was chic not to appear rich. What Brummell's aesthetic claimed for men in the nineteenth century had won over the feminine universe in an entirely different wav: flamboyant display was eclipsed in favor of the democratic aesthetic of purity restraint, and comfort. The heterogeneity of dress styles characteristie of the aristocratic order. in which ostentatious display was a social imperative intended to mark human and social differences in no uncertain terms, was replaced at the beginning of the twentieth century by a fashion that was "homogeneous in tendency, based precisely on a rejection of the principle of lofty, majestic exhibition of hierarchy. "Before," according to Poiret. "women were architectural elements, like ships' prows. and they were beautiful. Now they resemble underfed little telegraph operators." Social difference, no longer oversignified by dress, was now obscured by the decline in marks of visible sumptuousness. 'This dissolution of symbols of social distance clearly cannot be detached from the imagined democratic ideal of equality of conditions: in the long run, creatures recognized as being of the same essence cannot help offering self-images from which extreme disparities, blatant marks of a hierarchical gulf, are absent. At the deepest level of this revolution in women's clothing, following on the heels of an earlier revolution in men's dress. we find the advent of a society governed by the ideal of democratic equality. The process was not lacking in a certain ambiguity, however. Indeed, luxury did not disappear, but it had to be treated euphemistically, as an irreplaceable value of taste and class refinement at the heart of haute couture. The democratization of fashion did not mean that appearances had to be uniform or equalized: new signs, more subtle and more nuanced, particularly in the realm of labels, shapes, and fabrics, ensured that dress would continue to mark social distinctions and social excellence. Democratization signified a lessening of the marks of social distance, a muting of the aristocratic principle of conspicuous consumption, along with the new criteria of slenderness. youth, sex appeal, convenience, and discretion. The fashion system that lasted for a century did not eliminate signs of social rank. but it attenuated them by promoting values that stressed more personal attributes. Nor did the restrained democratic style carry the day with perfect uniformity. Alongside simple. lightweight daytime outfits, haute couture went on creating sumptuous, elaborate, hyperfeminine evening attire. The hundred years' fashion deepened the gulf between the types of women's clothing. On the one hand, there were daytime fashions for city and sports, governed by discretion. comfort, and functionality. On the other hand there were enchanting evening fashions designed to bring out the seductiveness of femininity. The democratization of fashion was accompanied by a disunification of feminine appearance: women's dress became much more varied in form. much less homogeneous. It could play on a greater number of registers, from the voluptuous woman to the relaxed woman, from the "schoolgirlish" woman to the professional woman, from the sportswoman to the sexy woman. The rejection of showy signs brought the feminine into the cyclic play of complete metamorphosis, the coexistence of disparate and sometimes antagonistic images. More directly than the idea of equality, cultural and aesthetic factors— sports, in particular-played a primordial role in the democratic revolution of feminine appearance. Even though they were not widely practiced. activities such as golf, tennis, cycling, swimming, mountain climbing, hiking, hunting, winter sports, and automobile driving helped modify the shape of women's clothing, slowly at first, then much more quickly after the First World War.6 The cardigan sweater came in with golf; around 189o, the bicycle allowed for bouffant pants drawn in below the knee and, in 1934, summer shorts; at the turn of the century, swimming gave impetus to the innovation of sleeveless bathing suits with a rounded décolleté, followed in the 192os by one-piece suits with bare legs and arms. In the 193os, two-piece bathing suits left backs completely exposed. Skirt lengths grew shorter for hockey, skating, and tennis starting in the 192os; in 1921, Suzanne Lenglen caused a sensation by playing tennis for the first time in a sleeveless white cardigan and a pleated skirt that came just below the knee. From the end of the nineteenth century on, sports clothes proliferated: in 1904, Burberry devoted a 254-page catalog almost entirely to ready-made sportswear. In the early 192os, haute couture plunged into the sportswear sector: in 1922, Patou offered a first showing of sportswear and outdoor outfits; he opened his shop, "Le Coin des Sports," in 1925. Sportswear made its first “classy" appearance in that era: it was considered chic even for walking about town and eating in restaurants. Going out in shorts, exposing one's legs, arms, back, or midriff, gradually became acceptable: the bikini appeared in the late 194os. The new supple. functional, sexy styles cannot be detached either from the growing popularity of sports or from the democratic-individualist universe affirming the primordial autonomy of individuals; these two things together set off a process that bared the female body and reduced the rigid constraints of clothing that had hampered the free expression of individuality. Sports lent dignity to the natural body; they allowed it to be displayed more directly. relieved of the excessive armature and trappings of dress. Sports not only prompted an evolution in specialized dress. they made a crucial contribution to the changing lines of women's clothing in general by creating a new aesthetic ideal of femininity. Through the cult of sports. the prototype of the slim, svelte, modern woman who plays tennis and golf took over from the sedentary woman hobbled by her flounces and lace. The simplification of clothing in the 192os, the elimination of gathers and frills in favor of restrained, clean lines, was a response to this new idea of lightness and energy drawn from sports. Between 1924 and 1929. Patou created all his designs on the same principles as his outdoor clothing and sportswear: "My clothes are made to practise le sport. . . . I have aimed at making them pleasant to the eye and allowing absolute liberty of movement."7 Forty years later, Courrèges's futurist lines of the 196os, the "Courrèges effect," did nothing more than radicalize this process in the name of the identical values of physical comfort and well-being: "I have sought a dynamic fashion, with constant concern for freedom of movement. ... Today's woman is liberated. She must also be liberated physically. She cannot be dressed as a static, sedentary figure" (Courrèges). In addition, it is impossible to ignore the considerable influence of trends in modern art on the democratie transformation of fashion following the First World War. The straight, flat-chested figure of the 192os woman harmonizes perfectly with the cubist pictorial space comprising planes and angles, vertical and horizontal lines, geometrical contours and flattenings; it echoes Léger's tubular universe, the stylistic austerity introduced by Picasso, Braque, and Matisse in the wake of Manet and Cézanne. Feminine voluminousness and roundness yielded to a purified, simplified appearance analogous to the work of the artistic avant-gardes. Fashion learned a lesson from the modernist project that began with Manet, a project characterized, according to Georges Bataille, by the “negation of eloquence." by the rejection of "grandiloquent verbiage," and by the majesty of images. By abandoning the poetics of ornamentation and glittering display. couture fashion worked to desublimate and deidealize the female figure, in part; it democratized clothing styles in the climate of the new modernist aesthetic values that tended toward the purification of forms and the rejection of the decorative. The democratization of appearance was matched by the extension and eventual generalization of a desire for fashion, a desire previously confined to the privileged strata of society. The hundred years' fashion not only brought divergent ways of dressing closer together, it also turned frivolous ephemera into objects of desire for the masses as it gave tangible form to the democratic right to fashion. Although increasingly broad strata of society had been gaining access to fashion over the centuries, it was only after the two world wars that the “right" to fashion gained a real foothold and won mass-market legitimacy. Earlier, when members of the lower classes imitated aristocratic dress they had been subject to sarcasm; that time had long since passed. What was deemed ridiculous in the democratic age was not so much imitation in fashion (apart from manifestations of snobbery) as being out-of-date; that was the new mass “taboo." The hundred years' fashion simultaneously freed personal appearance from traditional norms and imposed on all and sundry the ethos of change, the cult of modernity. Fashion was more than a right; it had become a social imperative. Through the magic of haute couture, fashion magazines, and fashion-plate celebrities, the masses were trained in the code of fashion, in the rapid variations of the seasonal collections, while at the same time the code of originality and personality was becoming sacred. One defining characteristic of the hundred years' fashion lies in the way an increasing demand for originality was accompanied by a synchronized, uniform, compulsory obedience to the codes of haute couture. Just as novelties were regularly prescribed for every season, immediately making everything that was done earlier out-of-date, fashion was followed step-by-step, as closely as possible; gaps, challenges, and antifashions began to be significant only in the i96os. On the one hand, homogeneous trends were imposed and an “official" fashion was proclaimed every season; on the other hand, the public at large conformed and submitted to uniform standards of dress. Despite its organizational specificity, the moment just described was related to the rigid and standardized age of the fashion trades.8 The fashion system that had been constituted in the name of the principle of individuality managed to spread only by imposing uniform, standardized norins, swallowing up the free play of personal difference. Along with disciplinary organizations and democratic institutions, the hundred years fashion helped detach our societies from the holistic, traditional order; it contributed to the establishment of universal centralized standards, and to the institution of the first phase of modern, authoritarian, individualist societies. ## Fashion as One of the Fine Arts Haute couture is responsible for the organization of fashion as we know it today, at least in its broad outlines: seasonal renewal. presentations of collections on live models, and, most important of all, a new vocation coupled with a new social status for the dressmaker. Here is the heart of the matter. Ever since Worth's day, the couturier has been recognized as a creator with a mission: to develop brand-new models, to launch new lines of clothing on a regular basis, lines that ideally reveal a special. distinctive. incomparable talent. Worth's move marked the end of fashion's traditional era and the beginning of its modern artistic phase. for Worth was the first to introduce constant change in forms, fabrics, and accessories. It was he who disrupted the uniformity of style to a degree that shocked public taste; it was he who dethroned crinolines and could thus be credited with starting a fashion "revolution." After centuries of relegation to subordinate status, the couturier had become a modern artist. one whose commanding law was innovation. In this context, fashion was increasingly identified with the creative abundance of haute couture. Before 193o. the great houses presented collections that included 150 to 300 new designs each season; in the 195os, when the average number still varied between 150 and 200, some 10,000 prototypes were created in Paris each year. The break with the past was clean and decisive. No longer a traditional artisan, a creature of routine, the couturier had become a designer, a modern artistic "genius." Up to that point, the tailor or dressmaker had little room for initiative: the patterns in use were obligatory. The general architecture of clothing and its basic elements were more or less immutable during a given period; only certain limited aspects of dress authorized a fanciful cut and style. 'The dressmaker had no creative role to play; not until the second half of the eighteenth century did "style merchants" appear. By then the fashion trades had won a certain creative autonomy, although that autonomy was confined under the circumstances to the ornaments and trimmings of dress. The artistic talent attributed to fashion merchants at that point thus consisted in a talent for decoration, the capacity to enhance and ennoble dress by means of fashionable accessories and conceits (hats, bonnets, gewgaws, braiding, ribbons, feathers, gloves, fans, scarves, and so on), not in the invention of original lines. Conservatism and uniformity in the construction of the whole, more or less pronounced fancy and originality in the details: this sums up the logic that had governed fashion ever since it came into being in the West, starting in the middle of the fourteenth century. And this is the mechanism that haute couture managed to overturn, by attributing to the designer a supreme vocation, the incessant creation of original prototypes. The shape of the garment itself took center stage: the garment's originality was no longer limited to furbelows and accessories, but now involved the pattern itself As Chanel put it later on: "Start with the dress, not the trimmings."9 In theory, the designer was now a "free" creator, operating without any constraints. In reality. at the head of an industrial and commercial enterprise, the great couturiers found their creative autonomy restricted by the mores of the times, by the styles in vogue, and by the particular nature of the product to be created, namely, clothing, which had to appeal to the customer's aesthetic values and not just satisfy the designer's pure creative inspiration. That is why the parallelism between the emergence of the couturier-creator and that of modern artists in the narrow sense can be carried only so far. The new indeed had become the rule, but painters, writers, and musicians had a freedom to experiment, a power to push back the frontiers of art, that had no parallel in fashion. Even if it was new, an article of clothing still had to appeal to the person who wore it, and it had to be becoming to that person: even if it was new, it must not appear prematurely or be overly contemptuous of conventions and tastes. The advent of haute couture did not change everything, then: as before, what was new in fashion remained a set of necessarily slow variations in the style of an epoch, a “comfortable adventure" (Sapir) and a “riskless" one compared to the harsh ruptures, the dissonances and provocations of modern art. Haute couture was indeed accompanied by organizational discontinuity, but against a background of continuity proper to fashion and its imperative of immediate seduction. Despite this conservatism that was consubstantial with fashion, haute couture systematized the logic of innovation to such an extent that we may legitimately see it as a special case, a less radical but nevertheless significant instance, of an unprecedented mechanism that was making its appearance in Europe: the avant-garde. It is more than a coincidence that certain great turn-of-the-century couturiers admired and befriended certain modern artists: Poiret's friends included Picabia, Vlaminck, Derain. and Dufy; Chanel had connections with Pierre Reverdy, Max Jacob, and Juan Gris; she made the costumes for Cocteau's Antigone, while Picasso did the sets and Honegger the music; Schiaparelli's collections were inspired by surrealism. Although it came about slowly, a proliferation of bold innovations in clothing challenged the aristocratic tradition (Poiret made fun of Chanel's famous “luxurious poverty"), the aesthetic tastes and the archetypal image of woman (the boyish look, eccentric evening dresses, shocking pink), and the prevailing mores and standards of decency: let us recall the knee-length dresses of the 192os, the deep décolleté in back and the general skimpiness of summer outfits and beach wear in the 1930s, the miniskirt of the 196os. In the 1920s, some American states passed laws designed to stem the tide of immodesty linked with shorter dresses;10 earlier, in the 19oos, the archbishop of Paris had allied himself with a protest holding couturiers responsible for indecent and provocative fashions. By the 192os, Chanel and Patou had already replaced the timehonored logic of complex ornamentation with that of stvle and austere lines; the revolution in women's dress that ensued in some sense "wiped the slate clean" with respect to the past, abandoning the ceremonial imperatives and luxurious trimmings characteristic of earlier fashion. A relative desublimation of fashion (the shirtdress) and the use of inexpensive materials (jersey, then burlap and sacking, or in Schiaparelli's case synthetic materials) paralleled trends in modernist art: the simplification or purification of fashion had its counterpart in certain efforts undertaken by cubists, abstract artists, and constructivists. Like art itself, haute couture plunged into a process of ruptures, escalations. and profound changes that related it—with all its nonlinearity, its zigzags, its apparent about-faces (Dior's New Look)—to the avant-garde. Even if the headlong forward movement was not reflected in extremist and destructive signs of dislocation, fashion was conquered, on its own scale. in a spirit of play. by a modern revolutionary logic; it had its discontinuities, its infatuation with newness, but also its excommunications, its rivalries, the factional struggles that are endemic to the world of creators. The new vocation of the couturier was coupled with an extraordinary rise in social status. Under the Old Regime, tailors and dressmakers were anonymous individuals relegated to the inferior sphere of the "mechanical arts"; their names, in the opuscules and texts that evoked fashion directly or indirectly, were almost never recorded. The novelties in current vogue bore the name of the important personage, the noble man or woman who had launched a given fashion. 'This changed in the nineteenth century: from Worth's day on, couturiers enjoyed unprecedented prestige. They were recognized as poets; their names were celebrated in fashion magazines; they appeared in novels in the guise of the aesthete, the unchallenged arbiter of elegance. Like a painter's, their works were signed, and they were protected by law. Through their ostentatious disdain for money and commerce, through their discourse on the necessity of “inspiration,; the great couturiers became recognized as “artists of luxury" (Poiret) who collected artworks and lived in sumptuous, refined decors surrounded by poets and painters; they themselves created costumes for the theater, ballet, and cinema, and thev subsidized artistic creation. Artistic allusions were all the rage in characterizations of designers: Dior was the Watteau of couturiers, Balenciaga the Picasso of fashion." Fashion creations themselves quoted works of art: there were the Mondrian or pop-art dresses, and Yves Saint-Laurent's Picasso skirts. High society, followed by the trade press. allowed the great couturiers not only to shore up their selfimage as artists but also to acquire enormous international reputations: in 1949. the Gallup Institute named Christian Dior as one of the five bestknown personalities in the world. However spectacular it may have been. this sort of rise in social status was not entirely unprecedented. Beginning in the mid-eighteenth century, in the fashion trades, hairdressers, shoemakers, and “fashion merchants' considered themselves——and were increasingly viewed by others as—sublime artists. The first treatises on the art of the coiffure, most notably those by Le Gros and Tissot, appeared around the same period. In his Traité des principes et de l’art de la coiffure. Diderot's coiffeur Lefèvre wrote: “Of all the arts. that of hairdressing ought to be one of the most highly valued; painting and sculpture. which allow men to live on for centuries after their death. cannot challenge its right to the status of fellow art; they cannot deny that they need it to complete their own works." The era of the great hairdressing artists was beginning: they worked in dress clothes, swords at their sides; they chose their own clientele and called themselves “creators." Le Gros put his art above painting, and he opened the first professional school for his trade, calling it the "Académie de Coiffure." Not long afterward. the name of Léonard was on everyone's lips: possibly the most famous coiffeur of them all, he was the object of Mme de Genlis's remark in 1769: “Finally Léonard came; he has arrived, and he is king."12 The same period witnessed the ascension of “sublime bootmakers,"“artists" of footwear.13 and the success of certain milliners was even more striking, as L. S. Mercier points out in Tableau de Paris: “The dressmakers who cut and sew the individual parts of the female garment are the masons of the building. The milliner, on the other hand, who produces the trappings, giving grace and the correct swing to the drapery, is the actual architect and decorator."1+ Milliners, who had recently supplanted haberdashers, made fortunes and enjoyed immense renown: Beaulard was hailed in song as a poet; Rose Bertin, Marie Antoinette's “Minister of Fashion," was celebrated in verse by the poet Jacques Delille, and her name turns up in letters, memoirs, and gazettes of the period. At this point, refinement, preciosity, and impudence were the order of the day among fashion artists, whose bills were exorbitant. Rose Bertin responded cynically to a client who was haggling over prices: “Is [Horace] Vernet paid simply for his canvas and paints?"15 Taking any event—the success of a play, a death, a political incident, a battle——as a pretext, the fashion merchants exercised their art on countless frills and furbelows: their artistic creations are what made prices go up. "In the selling price of a dress, as it appears in the fashion merchants' account books, the fabric (99 ells, or 107 meters of black velvet) is priced at 38o pounds, the cost of sewing is 18 pounds, and the trimmings come to 8oo pounds."16 During the Empire period, Leroy, as fatuous as he was famous, elevated tailors themselves to the rank of artists. As a fashion journal of the period remarked: "Messires the tailors disdain sewing today, and only concern themselves with what they call the design of the suit." At the same time, Mme Raimbaud, a famous dressmaker, was nicknamed “the Michelangelo of fashion" by the gazettes. Under the July Monarchy, Maurice Beauvais was consecrated "the Lamartine of fashion," while new dressmakers, both women (Vignon Palmyre, Victorine) and men (Staub, Blain, Chevreuil), came into prominence. By the time Worth took over as an "autocrat of taste." the principals of the fashion business had long since become artists. Worth's fame. followed by that of the great fashion houses, his condescension toward his clients, his wealth and his refinement, his artist's manners and his astounding bills, did not designate a historical turning point: they prolonged an ethos and a process of social ascension that had already been under way for more than a century. The consecration of the fashion trades cannot be separated from the new social representation of fashion that was emerging at roughly the same time. Fashions had come and gone for centuries without being objects of description for their own sake; there were no specialized journals, no professional chroniclers. When texts and opuscules referred to a fashion, it was assumed that readers were already familiar with it: any specific indications provided by moralists, religious writers, or preachers were merely pretexts for mocking or denouncing contemporary mores and human weaknesses: the pretensions of bourgeois social climbers, the passion for "appearances" of courtesans, the extravagance, inconstancy, jealousy, and covetousness of women. Whenever fashion was evoked. the satirical genre predominated. In their memoirs, great lords did not deign to mention fashionable trivia, nor did the highbrow literature where such lords were represented. Works that acquaint us in detail with the forms and features of clothing are rare; generally speaking, that sort of information was less important than the stylistie niceties of versification, or the jesting to which the trivia of fashion gave rise. With the appearance of the first illustrated fashion magazines at the end of the Old Regime, the treatment of fashion changed. From that point on, it was regularly described for its own sake and put on display: Le Magasin des modes françaises et anglaises, which appeared from 1786 to 1789, is subtitled "Ouvrage qui donne une connaissance exacte et prompte des habillements et parures nouvelles" (Work that gives timely and accurate information about the new clothing styles and accessories). Discourse on fashion proliferated not only in the specialized magazines, of which there were increasing numbers in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, but also among literary figures, especially in the nineteenth century, when they turned fashion into a subject worthy of attention and respect. Balzac wrote Traité de la vie élégante (183o), and Barbey d'Aurevilly published Du dandysme et de George Brummell (1845) along with various articles on fashion. Baudelaire wrote "In Praise of Cosmetics": he saw fashion as a constitutive element of beauty, a "symptom of the taste for the ideal," and he set out to "vindicate the art of the dressing-table from the fatuous slanders with which certain very dubious lovers of Nature have attacked it."17 Mallarmé himself wrote La Dernière Mode; at century's end, Goncourt, Maupassant, and Paul Bourget produced detailed and accurate portrayals of elegant living, depicting the surroundings of the “high life” and its delicate, refined, luxurious settings. Somewhat later, Proust described worldly rivalries and explored the psychological wellsprings of fashion and snobbery in the salons of the faubourg Saint-Germain. By the latter half of the eighteenth century. fashion was acknowledged as an entity to be glorified, described, exhibited. and dealt with philosophically; like sex, if not more so, it became a prolific machine for the production of texts and images. The new age of fashion was characterized by an overinvestment in issues of appearance and an unprecedented interest in novelty—those democratic passions that allowed people in the fashion trades, and especially the great couturiers, to rise to glory. Just as fashion was asserting itself as a sublime object, the epoch witnessed an outpouring of invented words designating fashionable individuals and the "latest thing" in the realm of elegance. In France, starting in the nineteenth century, the terms beaux, fashionables, dandys, lions and lionnes, cocodès. gommeux and gommeuses came into use; by century's end, smart had replaced urf, chic, copurchic, v’lan, rupin, sélect, ha, and pschutt. The early decades of the twentieth century saw the appearance of dernier bateau, dans le train, and up-to-date. The multiplication of discourses on fashion was accompanied by an accelerated proliferation of “in the know" (dans le vent) vocabulary paralleling the modern cult of the ephemeral. The elevation of fashion to social and aesthetic dignity went hand in hand with the promotion of numerous minor topics that came to be treated with the greatest seriousness, as we can judge from the tastes of dandies as well as from such works as Berchoux's La Gastronomie (18oo), Grimod de la Reynière's Almanach des gourmands (18o3), Brillat-Savarin's La Physiologie du goût (1825), Emile Marc Hilaire's Art de mettre sa cravate (1827) and his Art de fumer et de priser sans déplaire aux belles (1827), Eugène Ronteix's Manuel du fashionable (1828), and Balzac's Théorie de la démarche. In a movement of which dandyism offers an idiosyncratic but exemplary illustration, useless entities (decorations, gathering places, outfits, horses, cigars, meals) became primordial concerns, on equal footing with the traditionally noble preoccupations. The social ascension of people in the fashion trades is hardly an unprecedented phenomenon; in a sense, it can be linked with a much older set of claims, one inaugurated in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries by painters, sculptors, and architects who persisted in seeking for their professions the status of liberal arts, a status radically distinct from that of the mechanical or artisanal trades. But if the struggle of corporations to accede to the condition of artists and to enjoy social recognition was by no means new, the fact remains that the process was enhanced in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries bv the values characteristic of the modern age. What is remarkable, in fact, is the way in which the demand for a new status was manifested: all the evidence suggests that fashion artists exhibited an implausible degree of impudence and arrogance toward their clientele. even when dealing with the highest society. It is not easy to assess the insolence of a Charpentier, a Dagé,18 or a Rose Bertin, of whom Mme d'Oberkirch could say that she seemed to be “a strange person, very full of her own importance, and who treated princesses as her equals."1º The sublime milliners not only advanced the view that their art was as noble as that of poets and painters, they behaved as if they themselves were equal to nobles. From this standpoint, the claims of the fashion trades cannot be separated from the modern egalitarian ideal. The phenomenon is unprecedented, and it reveals the impetus of social ambition that was a corollary of the dawning age of democracy. Tocqueville had already made a similar observation: "When this same equality was first established in France. it gave birth at once to almost unlimited ambitions.... Every revolution increases men's ambitions, and that is particularly true of a revolution which overthrows an aristocracy."20 Moreover, such haughtiness and impudence were by no means confined to the fashion trades: they appeared just as often in the behavior of young people who prided themselves on being fashionable, refined, and elegant (petits-maîtres, muscadins, incroyables, fashionables, dandys), as well as in literature, where a new attitude toward the reader was beginning to appear. Authors such as Stendhal, Mérimée, Alfred de Musset, and Théophile Gautier manifested their contempt for the tastes of the general publie and their fear of being thought common by using a style that consists in impudent badinage, scornful allusions, and cavalier remarks addressed to the reader.21 Artistic pretensions and the insolence of people in the fashion trades cannot be separated from the tendency of ambition, conceit, and vanity to appear outside the upper classes, a tendency that characterizes the passage of societies into the era of equality. It is quite obvious that the consecration of fashion creators can be explained only in part through corporatist ambition, even if such ambition is exacerbated by claims to equality. If fashion people won recognition as artists of genius, it is because a new sensitivity to ephemera and new aspirations had come into plav, offering new ways of valorizing phenomena that had previously been unworthy of notice. Since the Renaissance, fashion had unquestionably enjoyed a certain degree of respect as a symbol of social excellence and of court life. Not to such an extent, however, that it deserved to be exalted and depicted in its down-to-earth details. In aristocratic eras, fashion is too material an expression of hierarchy to warrant attention. The elevated style in literature featured heroic exploits, the glorious, magnanimous attitudes of exceptional beings, the ideal, pure love of great souls, rather than the obvious little things, the concrete realities— however luxurious—that common folk can attain and possess. The only legitimate models were found in figures of devotion, glory, and sublime love, not in images of fashion. Frivolities could be promoted only because new standards were imposed, standards that disqualified not only the essentially feudal heroic cult, but also the traditional Christian morality that considered frivolities as signs of the sin of pride, offenses against God and one's neighbor. Linked to the progressive disaffection from heroic values and religious morality. fashion's ascent was inseparable from the new credit it enjoyed at court and in town, especially from the eighteenth century on, by pleasure and happiness, novelty and material comfort, freedom conceived as the satisfaction of desires and the relaxation of strict conventions and moral prohibitions. From that point on, personal enjoyment tended to take precedence over glory, agreeableness and refinement over grandeur, seduction over sublime exaltation, voluptuousness over ostentatious majestv. the decorative over the emblematic. The modern cult of fashion grew out of this lowering of the idea of grandeur and its corollary, the raising of human and worldly concerns to a higher dignity. The defense of happiness, the quest for what was agreeable, and the aspiration to a freer, happier, easier life brought about a gradual humanization of the sublime, a less majestic, less lofty conception of the beautiful along with an ennobling of useful things, "little pleasures," decorative fancies, secular beauties and refinements: trimmings, trinkets, “little apartments," interior decoration, miniatures, small theater boxes, and so on. The hegemony of the majestic was replaced by an aesthetic of graceful forms, praise for seductive lightness, for variety as the source of pleasure and excitement. At the heart of fashion's modern status, we find the new individualist morality that lent dignity to freedom, pleasure, and happiness: Le Magasin des modes, whose epigraph indicates that“uniformity gave birth one day to lassitude," was quite in tune with the hedonistic spirit of the century (however compatible it may also have been with reason, moderation, and virtue); it was infatuated with unexpected sensations, surprises, and renewals. At the heart of fashion's ascent, there is the repudiation of sin, the rehabilitation of self-love, of human passions and desire in general. The same magazine defined its goals as follows: “Give all individuals the opportunity to satisfy the passion with which they are born for the objects that will allow them to appear to the best advantage and get the most attention." The individualist ideology and the sublime age of fashion were thus inseparable. They both entailed a cult of self-development and wellbeing, material enjoyment, the desire for freedom, the will to diminish authority and moral constraints: “holistic" and religious standards. incompatible with the dignity of fashion, were undermined not only by the ideology of freedom and equality but also by the ideology of pleasure. which is just as characteristic of the individualist era. As we have already seen, the triumph of pleasure and ephemera was facilitated by a number of factors: the increase in wealth, the development of "court society" and salons, the strengthening of the absolutist monarchy, and the new position in which the nobility found itself. Dispossessed of any real power, the nobility was reduced to finding its svmbols of excellence in artifices and superfluities at a time when the wealthy bourgeoisie was seeking to imitate noble manners as never before. The Revolution and the abolition of privilege further accentuated the process by fostering the desire to raise one's station in life, to excel. to cross barriers, to stand out above the common people, the vulgar herd. At the same time, the Revolution maintained the aristocracy as the beacon of worldly existence. and fostered a heightened aestheticization of appearances. Nevertheless. it would be far too simplistic to equate the phenomenon of fashion with an elitist device for class recognition and differentiation in a society in which inequality of birth was no longer legitimized, in which stable criteria of social dignity were dissolving, and in which prestige was no longer so much awarded as conquered. Viewed in a long-term perspective, fashion in its new status has to be interpreted rather as a phase and an instrument of the democratic revolution. Indeed, the artistie consecration of fashion means nothing if not a lowering of the sense of the sublime, a humanization of ideals, a new primacy of "small pleasures" accessible to all and a corresponding obsession with small differences and subtle nuances. The democratic ideal of seduction, rapid success. and immediate pleasure won out over the heroic exaltation of greatness and the excesses of aristocratic morality. Moreover, by attributing greater dignity to inferior phenomena and functions, by blurring the boundary between noble art and modest art, the empire of fashion helped promote equality. The dissolution of the hierarchy of genres and trades, which instituted theoretical equality among formerly heterogeneous realms, allows the celebration of fashion to appear as a manifestation of democracy, even though fashion arose in the name of distinctive differences within a world of privilege. Significantly, as fashion and the people engaged in it were winning their own letters of nobility, people engaged in intellectual pursuits—philosophers, writers, poets—were also acquiring immense prestige. They were sometimes viewed as the “equal of kings" (this was Voltaire's case, for example), and they took on the preeminent roles of guides, educators, and prophets to the human race.22 Just as the fashion artist took over as arbiter of elegance, intellectuals, poets and, later, scientists claimed the right to legislate values, to educate the populace, and to govern public opinion in the interest of progress and public welfare. However, alongside this triumph of intellectuals and artists with a mission, another phenomenon emerged in the Romantic period, around the middle of the nineteenth century in particular. when artists began to offer ambivalent, mocking representations of themselves.23 The artist's glory and downfall, the supreme splendor of art and its illusory nature, went hand in hand. Later, avantgarde creators even undermined their own work as artists, sought out anti-artistic“ moves. and declared art inferior to life. This tragic aspect of artistic representation contrasts with a triumphant, wholly positive image of fashion and the great couturier; the latter is an artist who understands frivolous mockery as a necessarv game: “The spirit of contradiction in Fashion is so frequent and so regular that one can see in it almost a law. Do not women wear fox furs on light dresses, velvet hats in August, and straw ones in Februarv? ... There is in the decisions of fashion and of women a kind of provocation to common sense that is charming."2+ While the great couturier basked in worldwide fame, avant-garde artists, painters in particular. experienced an unmistakable lowering of status and social rejection: in the 186os their works created a scandal, giving rise to a storm of public mockery, contempt, and hostility. A rift opened up between academic art and the new art: innovative painters were doomed to be misunderstood by the vast majority of the public and thus condemned to lead a precarious bohemian life of rebellion; the fate of the “accursed artists" stood in sharp contrast to that of the great couturiers with their fortunes, their flashy displays, their acceptance of the prevailing values. The glory of the couturiers corresponded to a decline in the prestige of innovative artists: the former were celebrated, the latter degraded. Here too, democratic logic pursued its task of equalizing conditions, dissolving extreme differences and hierarchies, raising the status of one group while lowering that of another, however ambiguously—for modern art never ceased to draw from its very degradation a confirmation of its own supremacy. The epoch that glorified fashion also put it off-limits to men. Fantasy was banished; men's tailors never shared in the aura of the great couturiers, and no specialized press was devoted to men's clothing. Modern societies divided up the empire of fashion in a radical way: the apotheosis of feminine fashion was paralleled by the repression or denegation of masculine fashion, a repression symbolized by the use of black dress clothes and, later, the suit and tie. To be sure, dandyism undertook to "spiritualize" fashion, and the issues of male elegance, posture, and correctness came up again and again. For the most part, however, fashion and its prestige were now restricted to the universe of women; fashion had become an art in the feminine gender. If the modern era broke down the division between noble art and fashion, it paradoxically accentuated the division between men's and women's appearance as never before; it gave birth to an obvious inequality in the way the sexes presented themselves and in their relation to seduction. Little remains to be said about the “great male renunciation" of fashion and its connection with the rise of democracy and the bourgeoisie. The neutral, austere, sober masculine costume reflected the consecration of egalitarian ideology as the conquering bourgeois ethic of thrift, merit. and work. Costly aristocratic dress, a sign of celebration and pomp. was replaced by clothing that expressed the new social values of equality. economy, and effort. Men were excluded from the glitter of artifice in favor of women, who for their part were destined to reintroduce symbols of luxury seduction, and frivolity. Still, must we see this new distribution of appearances as merely a form of what Veblen called "vicarious consumption." a way of continuing, through women, to display financial clout and male social status? To do so would be to underestimate the weight of the cul tural and aesthetic representations that have been attached for millennia to the position of the feminine. Whatever role may be played here by ostentatious class spending, women's monopolization of artifice can only be understood in relation to the collective representation of the "fair sex" as destined to please and seduce by its physical attributes and by the play of the factitious. Fashion's new gender disjunction and the preeminence of the feminine that it instituted extended the social definition of the "second sex," its timeless taste for artifice as an aid to seducing and appearing beautiful. By putting women's fashion on a pedestal. by reaffirming the primordial requirement of feminine beauty, the hundred years' fashion represented a continuation of the representations, values, and predilections of the feminine that had ruled for centuries. ## Seduction in Power The creative vocation of the couturier that defined haute couture itself was inseparable from a new logic that governed the mechanism of fashion: an organizational mutation marked fashion's entry into the age of modern production. Until Worth's day, tailors, dressmakers, and fashion merchants had gone on working in direct contact with clients, collaborating in putting together complete outfits. The elegant woman made her own tastes and preferences known, and in that way gave direction to the fashion trades: thus Rose Bertin could refer to her hours of “work" with the queen. Fashion professionals had not vet achieved a sovereign right to creative freedom; they were subordinate, at least in principle, to the wishes of their individual customers. In the mid-eighteenth century, the fashion trades were clearly valorized in a new way, but there was no corresponding transformation in the way the work itself was conceived and organized. Professionals of fashion had won glory and social status, to be sure, but not creative autonomy. In relation to this artisanal structure, the move Worth made was crucial: it amounted to abolishing the millennial logic of subordination and collaboration between dressmaker and client in favor of a logic that honored the designer's independence. By repeatedly dreaming up original designs among which the client had only to choose, by having his own wife serve as a model at the races or in the Bois de Boulogne, Worth implemented the dual principle that constitutes fashion in the current sense of the term: the designer-couturier gained autonomy in theory and in fact. while the client lost the initiative in the matter of dress. This shift marks the unmistakable historical novelty of haute couture: the era in which clients cooperated with dressmakers on a design that was in the final analysis unchangeable gave way to an era in which articles of clothing were invented. created from start to finish, by professionals according to their own "inspiration" and taste. The woman became a mere consumer. albeit at the level of luxury, while the couturier was transformed from artisan into sovereign artist. Worth's arrogance, the authority with which he addressed women of the highest society, must be understood in this context: more than a character trait, it must be seen as a rupture, as the assertion of a newly acquired right on the dressmaker's part to legislate freely in matters of elegance. The revolution in the way fashion was organized did not emerge with the radical consistency of a logical schema at the start. Until the beginning of the twentieth centurv, designs were sometimes exclusive, adapted to the tastes of each client. Poiret tried to downplay the couturier's newly acquired importance by insisting on the still-crucial role of a certain clientele: “A Parisienne, especially, never adopts a model without making in it changes of capital importance, and particularising it to suit herself. An American woman chooses the model presented to her, and buys it just as it is, while a Parisienne wants it to be blue if it is green, or garnet if it is blue, and adds a fur collar, and changes the sleeves, and suppresses the bottom button."25 Still, whatever psychological truth these considerations may hold, they must not be allowed to obscure the main point: the advent of demiurgic power on the couturier's part, and the concomitant exclusion of the wearer. The couturier had the upper hand in the conception of the garment; at best, the elegant woman had the privilege of introducing modifications in certain details. The overall design belonged to the couturier; minor details were left to the client, with advice from the saleswoman, who took care to see that the couturier's spirit and trademark were not disfigured. Moreover, as private customers grew fewer in number over time, and as haute couture produced more and more prototypes destined for export. the more or less “discretionary" power of the modern couturier continued to increase. Haute couture thus entailed more than anything else the constitution of a specialized power that exercised its own separate authority. in the name of elegance, creative imagination, and change. Viewed in these terms. haute couture has to be resituated within a much broader historical movement, precisely that of the rationalization of power in modern societies. Since the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, our societies have in fact witnessed the emergence of new forms of management and control that can be called bureaucratic, and that typically aim to penetrate and reshape society, to organize and reconstitute forms of socialization and behaviors in their smallest details from a "rational" viewpoint. Bureaucratic control takes over the elaboration of the social order from start to finish, through a distinct power structure based on a systematic separation of functions: direction is disconnected from execution, the creative process detached from manufacturing. As it happens, this is preciselv the structure we find in haute couture. With the de facto exclusion of the user and the monopolization of power in the hands of those who specialized in elegance, an identical bureaucratic logic came to organize fashion, factories. schools, hospitals, and barracks. There was just one difference: couturiers set forth their laws in the name of taste and novelty rather than in the name of positive rational knowledge. This bureaucratic logie ended up structuring the entire organization of the great fashion houses: they were henceforth arranged in a pyramid with the studio where designs were developed at the top, and specialized workshops (sleevemakers, bustmakers, skirtmakers, "mechanics," and later hemstitchers and the workers who produce formal dresses, suits, and so on) at the bottom; the workers places were marked hierarchically as well ("first" and "second" in the workshop, first and second hand, petite main, apprentice). Haute couture's status as a luxury industry with women of the highest society as its clients did not alter the historically crucial fact that it was responsible for fashion's shift from the artisanal order to the modern bureaucratic order. Furthermore, one cannot help recognizing the bonds of kinship that united haute couture with the very purpose of modern bureaucratic organization, that is, its will to dissolve the stability of traditional social forns in favor of an operative, well-informed, and goal-oriented rationality. It is finally a question of disengaging fashion from a still fundamentally traditional order in which novelty was a random and irregular occurrence, and in which the right to initiate change remained an aristocratic privilege rooted in the structure of a caste society. With haute couture, innovations may have remained unpredictable, but they became obligatory and part of a regular process: no longer a birthright, they became a function of a relatively autonomous specialized apparatus defined by talent and worth Fashion, like the other dimensions of the human world, was opened up to accelerated experimentation, to the modern voluntarist era of ruptures and revolutions. It is important to note at once that the bureaucratic organization in question was of a rather special type, for the great fashion houses were headed not by some anonymous power independent of the person who exercised it, as is the case in many modern democratic institutions, but by artists who were at least in theory irreplaceable and unique, by virtue of their style, their tastes, their "genius." In the case of haute couture, unlike strictly bureaucratic organizations, the individual was inseparable from the function. Couturiers were defined by their unique talent, their label which in the case of the greatest couturiers might be “immortalized," perpetuated even after their death (the Chanel style offers one example). In a unique way. haute couture brought together the bureaucratic process and a process of personalization manifested by the couturier's aesthetic, irreplaceable "omnipotence." In this sense, haute couture belonged to those new institutions that were inseparable from a sacralization of persons, whereas modern society is defined in just the opposite way by an anonymous disembodying of political and administrative power.26 The diluted, impersonal logic of domination characteristic of the bureaucratic democratic states is complemented by the magical power of superindividuals on whom the masses bestow their adulation: great actresses and great couturiers, sports figures and popular singers, movie stars and show-business idols. As political agencies stop displaying signs of superpower, symbols of their otherness with respect to society, quasi-divine figures arise in the cultural" field; such sacred monsters enjoy unparalleled honor and thus restore a certain hierarchical difference at the very heart of the egalitarian modern world. Haute couture is an emblem of the modern bureaucratic age. Still, it would be inaccurate to link it with the historically dated form of bureaucratic control constituted by the disciplinary apparatus as described by Michel Foucault. Indeed, instead of the production of useful bodies, with haute couture there is a glorification of luxury and frivolous refinement; instead of stylistic uniformity there is a plurality of models; instead of prescriptive programming and the minutiae of rules, there is an appeal to personal initiative; instead of regular, constant, impersonal coercion, there is the seduction of the metamorphoses of appearance; instead of a micropower exercised over every little detail, there is a power that relinquishes control over accessory elements to individuals and concentrates on the essentials. Quite clearly, even though it was bureaucratic, haute couture as an organization put into play not the technologies of disciplinary constraint but previously unknown processes of seduction that inaugurated a new logic of power. Seduction appeared at the outset, in techniques for commercialization of the new styles. In the nineteenth century, by organizing fashion shows and using live models, haute couture—like department stores, indoor galleries (the Parisian “passages"), and World's Fairs—was already establishing an advanced tactic of modern commerce, based on the theatricalization of merchandise, fanciful advertising, and appeals to desire. The idealized models of haute couture were the luxurious live counterparts of attractive shopwindows. Thus haute couture contributed to the great commercial revolution that is still under way. The aim is to encourage people to spend and consume without guilt, through strategies that use advertising displays and product overexposure. Still, the seduction process at work goes well beyond these devices of magical display. even if thev are reinforced by the canonical and unreal beauty of models or the photogenic quality of cover girls. At a deeper level, the seduction process works through intoxication with change, the multiplication of prototvpes. and the possibility of individual choice. We must not be too quick to rule out the dimension of freedom of choice, although some theorists hasten to call it illusory on the grounds that fashion is tyrannical, that it dictates the chic line of the year to all women. Actually, an enormous gulf separates prehaute couture fashion with its uniform patterns from plurivocal modern fashion with its highly diversified collections, no matter how much overall homogeneity there may be. The rigid imposition of a particular cut vielded to the seductiveness of choice and change, which had as its subjective counterpart a myth of individuality, originality, and personal metamorphosis, dreams of an ephemeral harmony between one's inner self and one's outward appearance. Haute couture did not discipline fashion or make it uniform so much as it individualized fashion: "There ought to be as many models as there are women."2? 'The distinguishing feature of haute couture is not so much that it imposed homogeneous standards as that it diversified styles in order to emphasize individual personalities, to consecrate the value of originality in dress, even to the point of extravagance (as with Schiaparelli). "What have you got to do with fashion? So, don't bother yourself with it, and simply wear what becomes you."28 Haute couture, an organization with an individualist orientation, took a stand against standardization, against uniformity of appearance, against mass mimicry; it upheld and glorified the expression of personal differences. Moreover, haute couture unleashed an original process within the fashion order: it psychologized fashion by creating designs that gave concrete form to emotions, personality, and character traits. Henceforth, depending on her clothes. a woman could appear melancholy, casual, sophisticated, severe, insolent, ingenuous, whimsical, romantic, gay, young, amusing, or athletic: furthermore, the fashion magazines chose to stress these psychological essences and their original combinations.29 The individualization of modern fashion is inseparable from the personalizing and psychologizing of elegance: by the same token, what formerly appeared as signs of class and social hierarchy had a tendency to become increasingly, although not exclusively. psychological signs, expressions of a soul or personality. "Visit the great dressmakers, and you will not feel that you are in a shop, but in the studio of an artist, who intends to make of your dresses a portrait and a likeness of yourself."30 The psychologizing of appearance is accompanied by the narcissistic pleasure of transforming oneself in one's own eyes and those of others, of "changing one's skin," feeling like— and becoming—someone else, by changing the way one dresses. Haute Couture offered new ways for women to realize their desires for metamorphosis: it broadened the scope of seduction through appearance. Women could look athletic in shorts or trousers, highfalutin in a cocktail dress, businesslike in a suit, haughty or vampish in an evening sheath; the modern seductiveness of haute couture stems from the way it has managed to bring into coexistence luxury and individuality, “class" and originality, personal identity and the ephemeral alteration of the self. “At each season, what [women] are seeking is perhaps, even more than a dress, a renewal of their psychological makeup. Fashion has a role to play vis-à-vis women: it helps them to exist. It can even take the place of drugs!"31 The break with the disciplinary order is revealed just as clearly by the logic of indetermination., which was henceforth consubstantial with fashion. No doubt the prototypes were quite carefully conceived and prepared separately, in the laboratories of haute couture; nevertheless, couturiers were by no means the sole artisans of fashion. Fashion took shape after the collections were presented; much depended on the particular patterns chosen by clients and by certain fashion magazines. The fashion of the year appeared only when the selections of a certain clientele and the press had converged on particular patterns. This is a crucial point: the couturiers did not know in advance which of their designs would be successful. Thus haute couture created fashion without knowing precisely what its destiny would be, without knowing which fashion would prevail. Fashion remained subject to public choice; it was indeterminate, even though its prototypes were arranged from beginning to end by the great couturiers. Couturiers propose, women dispose," someone has said: it is easy to see what distinguishes this mechanism, which integrates the unpredictability of demand into its own workings, from the disciplinary power that consists essentially in leaving nothing to individual initiative, in imposing standard traditional rules from on high, in controlling and planning the chain of behavior from beginning to end. This indeterminacy is not residual; it is constitutive of the system itself. This is obvious when one knows that only one-tenth of the designs in a collection, in the early decades of this century, won the backing of clients. “The total balance sheet of a season is thus about thirty successful patterns out of the three hundred presented."32 Public tastes, the choices made by magazines and movie stars— factors such as these came to play a central role, to such an extent that thev were able to counter the tendencies of haute couture. Thus the fashion of the 192os was imposed more by women customers than by haute couture: In 192ı Haute Couture declared war on short hair—without success. In 1922 it fought against short dresses, and in fact skirts suddenly became long again, but with the waist very much lowered. The winter collections were very colourful in an attempt to banish the black preferred by women It was a failure; in the spring collections, everything was black once again."33 The lean and delicate shape of the Adonis-woman in a shirtdress gained ground, countering the dominant trends of haute couture. which continued for a time—before finally giving up—to offer women collections that were rich in trimmings, "looseness," rounded and draped forms. Programming fashion while remaining unable to impose it. conceiving of it as a whole while simultaneously offering an array of choices. haute couture inaugurated a new type of supple power that functioned without issuing rigid injunctions and that incorporated into its processes the unpredictable and varied tastes of the public. This mechanism had a bright future: it was to become the preponderant form of social control in democratic societies as they embarked on the era of consumption and mass communication. In consumer societies, products are governed in fact by the same principle that underlies the designs of the couturiers' collections. They are never offered in just one unique form; increasingly, the consumer is invited to choose between one variant and another, between one set of accessories, or gamuts, or programs, and another, and to combine the elements of cach more or less freely. Like haute couture, mass consumption implies the multiplication of models, the diversification of series, the production of optional differences, the stimulation of a personalized demand. More generally speaking, in open societies, the bureaucratic apparatuses that currently organize production, distribution, the media, education, and leisure activities reserve a growing, systematic place for individual desires. We are in the second generation of the bureaucratic age: after the era of compulsory discipline, we have entered the era of personalization, choice, and combinatory freedom. This immense upheaval in modalities and goals of power is winning over increasingly broad sectors of social life today. and haute couture was the first link in the chain. With haute couture an experiment was undertaken, prior to psychoanalysis but analogous to it, involving a new logic of power that renounced mastery and flawless foresight; it no longer worked through imperative, impersonal. global constraints. but it left individuals and society room for initiative. The comparison with psychoanalysis should not come as a surprise, for the same reversal of disciplinary power is at work there in an exemplary manner. On the one hand, psychoanalysis is based on the patient's free associations, on the analyst's silence, and on transference, as if medical power had taken note of the ineradicable component of subjective singularities and the impossibility of totally dominating or controlling individuals.3+ On the other hand, modern fashion diversifies models, solicits differences, and opens up the indeterminate space of choice, preference, or random taste. This constitutes not an abdication of power but the emergence of an open. flexible power, a power of seduction that prefigures the very power that is to become dominant in the society of excessive choice. What we know as fashion "trends," that is, the similarities existing among the designs of different collections in a given year (waistline placement. skirt length. shoulder width) often lead to the mistaken belief that fashion is decreed through deliberate concert among the couturiers. Instead, these "trends" only confirm the “open" logic of haute couture's powers. On the one hand, trends are inseparable from haute couture viewed as a closed. bureaucratic phenomenon in Paris: the couturiers, though they go to great pains to assert their uniqueness, cannot develop their own collections without taking into account the original contributions of their competitors. since fashion's vocation is to astonish and to invent endless novelty. A couturier's unprecedented idea, often tentative and not fully exploited at first, is under these circumstances very quickly recognized as such: it is seized upon, transposed, and developed by others in subsequent collections. This is how fashion changes, first by groping and sending out trial balloons, then through sedimentations and mimetic amplifications" that are nevertheless in all cases individual. All these processes are brought about by the professional logic of constitutive renewal, and they explain why abrupt shifts in fashion (the New Look, for example) are much rarer than slow changes, contrary to common belief And yet trends escape bureaucratic logic in that they also result from the choices made by the clientele and, since the Second World War, by the press, which at any given moment favors particular sorts of designs. Trends tell us as much about the power of public or journalistic infatuations as about the power of the couturiers, for the latter are constrained by the threat of commercial failure to follow the public's movement, to adapt to the tastes of the times. Similarities among collections are by no means signs of a secret agreement among the couturiers (quite to the contrary, the latter hide their prototypes jealously), nor does it signify omnipotence on the part of designers; instead, it is the effect of the encounter between an aesthetic bureaucracy and the logic of demand.35 ## A Brief Genealogy of Haute Couture If we go by the standard studies of modern fashion, there is nothing complicated or mysterious about the genesis of haute couture. Its relations with the capitalist order, with the profit system, and with class rivalries are presented as determining. Without question, indeed. haute couture is an industrial and commercial luxury enterprise; its goal is profit making and its endless creations produce an obsolescence that promotes ever more rapid consumption. Without question, too, the idea (borrowed from working-class and then petit bourgeois industrial manufacturing) of grouping previously separate operations—direct purchasing at the factory. fabric sales, the manufacture of ready-made garments—is inseparable from the capitalist motivation of realizing a “triple benefit." as Worth's son was quick to recognize.36 Without doubt, finally, the idea of displaying designs on live models is a well-conceived advertising scheme inspired by the same profit motive. Still, however important a role economic motivation may have played, it obscures the original fact that haute couture always appears as a formation with two faces, the economic and the aesthetic. the bureaucratic and the artistic. The logic of profit making fostered the creation of novelties; by itself, however, and even in concert with the principle of competition among fashion houses, it cannot explain either the escalation in the number of creations in the collections or the stylistic research, sometimes avant-garde in nature, that characterizes modern fashion. Haute couture set in motion a permanent process of aesthetic innovation that cannot be deduced mechanically from the logie of economics. For this reason, the classical theory of social distinction and class competition has been widely invoked. At the most basic level, the emergence of haute couture has to be related to the principle according to which the dominant classes are in search of honorifie recognition. Within this theory. haute couture appears to be a class institution expressing in its own particular register the ascendancy of the bourgeoisie, and the bourgeois desire to earn social recognition through the intermediary of sumptuous feminine emblems at the very moment when masculine clothing had ceased to be flashy, and when the democratization of appearance was being consolidated owing to the rise of industrial manufacturing of clothing. In this view, haute couture represented a reaction against the modern "leveling' of personal appearance; it was a product of "internal struggles within the dominant class." In short, haute couture won out, as it were, through a kind of sociological imperative, given the competitive struggles and strategies for distinction attributed to the upper classes. Under these conditions haute couture was nothing but an "apparatus for the production of class emblems corresponding to "symbolic struggles"; these emblems were intended to supply the dominant class with "profits of distinction" proportionate to its econonic position.3: The mechanistic economic interpretation is coupled with the sociological dialectic of distinction. If the role of the quest for social distinction in fashion is undeniable, the fact remains—and needs to be emphasized—that that quest cannot shed any light on the emergence of that feature of haute couture that constitutes its incomparable historical originality, namely, its bureaucratic organizational logic. The argument that haute couture grew up in reaction to the manufacturing of clothing. and in the service of class distinctions,38 does not stand up to an examination of the historical facts. Under the Second Empire, the manufacture of women's clothing, although it was already reaching a bourgeois clientele, remained limited, since the technologies did not yet permit precise fitted manufacturing for a whole sector of feminine apparel: the first dresses made according to standard measures did not appear until after 187o. Manufacturing techniques mainly produced the loose-fitting elements of dress (lingerie, shawls, mantillas, coats, and mantelettas): for the rest, women continued to turn to their dressmakers, and went on doing so for a long time. Mass production was therefore a long wav from invading the marketplace when Worth set up his fashion house. In fact. manufacturing was not a "threat" to the upper classes, since the quality of the fabrics. the luxuriousness of the trimmings, and the fame of the dressmakers continued to permit the display of prestigious differences. Factional rivalries within the dominant class, competition between those who had "arrived\* and those who claimed they had, between the wealthier and the less wealthy, the old and the new, certainly existed. Still, how can such phenomena, which are by no means unprecedented, account for the institutional break represented by haute couture? In terms of the dynamics of symbolic struggles alone, haute couture and its modern bureaucratic mechanism did not win out entirely, for the old production system managed perfectly well to keep on furnishing emblems of “class." Yet an organizational mutation did in fact occur: it consisted in the separation of professionals from customers and the regular creation of new designs. The new bureaucratic-artistic organization cannot be interpreted as an echo of social distinction. At a more basic level, haute couture is inconceivable without the revolutionary overturning of the social and juridical order of the Old Regime that occurred in France at the end of the eighteenth century. Thus the historical possibility of an unfettered production of clothing can be traced back to the abolition of the corporations by the Constituent Assembly in 1791. Up to that point, the custom- and rule-based policies of the Old Regime had prevented tailors and dressmakers from stocking and selling fabric; thus they could not produce clothing they had created in advance. The idea of producing ready-made garments, of combining the purchase of fabric, its sale, and its “fashioning," was first introduced in the industrial production of items destined for the lower and middle classes: it was later brought into play at the level of luxury items, first by Mme Roger.39 and then, more significantly, by Worth and haute couture. This practice stems from the democratic dissolution of the corporate regime. the abolition of maîtrises and jurandes. Nevertheless, even though this change was crucial, it was by no means a historically sufficient condition to account by itself for the emergence of a bureaucratic and artistic organization. Without the legitimizing of new historical values, sociological and juridical factors alone could never have given rise to the separate institution of haute couture. The conclusion is inescapable: the ideas and social representations of the modern world were not secondary superstructures: they were at the heart of the bureaucratization of fashion. If class competition, the profit motive, and the abolition of corporations succeeded in giving haute couture its well-known aspect. they did so chiefly by reinforcing the legitimacy of the social value of novelty. a reinforcement triggered by the advent of democratic individualist societies.\*0 Since the end of the Middle Ages, the value of newness had certainly gained a foothold, but from the eighteenth century on. its social valorization increased significantly. This is directly attested by the artistic celebration of fashion, and indirectly by the proliferation of social utopias, the cult of the Enlightenment, the idea of revolution, and demands for equality and freedom. The ecstasy of newness is consubstantial with democratic eras. This crescendo in desires for change contributed importantly to the birth of haute couture as a bureaucratie formation based on the separation of the professional and private spheres and devoted to continuous creation. The modern religion of novelty, an emphatie devaluation of the old in favor of modernity, was a prerequisite if women were to give up their traditional control over their own dress, if society was to abandon the timeless principle according to which those who provide work for artists have "a choice and a voice" in the products they order. 'Through the intermediary of the new, the artisanal organization, with its sluggish motion and its random innovations, could yield precisely to “an industry whose very raison d'être is to create novelty."+ Indeed, when newness asserts itself as the supreme requirement, a second requirement necessarily accompanies it in the short or the long run: the couturier's independence becomes legitimate and obligatory. Hence the existence of a separate agency entirely devoted to creative innovation, detached from the ineluctable conservatism and inertia of social demand. The bureaucratic autonomy of fashion could not have come about without the simnultaneous recognition of the ultimate value of individual freedom. Like modern art, haute couture is inseparable from the individualist ideology. According to this new ideology, autonomous independent individuals are freed of the age-old obligation to conform to the rites, customs, and traditions that prevail in society as a whole. The advent of the representation of the self-sufficient individual means that preexisting norms no longer have an absolute foundation with respect to human will; there are no more sacred rules: lines and styles are to be invented from a position of sovereignty, in conformity with the modern right to freedom. This new situation gives rise to the possibility of pushing back the frontiers of appearance further and further, of creating new aesthetic codes; the emergence of the independent couturier is one manifestation of the individualist conquest of unfettered creativity. It is far too simplistic to explain the multiplication of designs, the stylistic breaks, and the couturiers' excesses by invoking the sociological constraints of distinction and economic motivation: the headlong advance of modern fashion, however useful it may have been to business, was possible only thanks to the modern ideal of newness and its corollary, creative freedom. The revolution accomplished by Poiret at the beginning of the twentieth century sheds retrospective light on the ideological genesis of haute couture; thus when Poiret writes that "it was equally in the name of Liberty that I proclaimed the fall of the corset and the adoption of the brassière,"+2 what is at issue is less women's freedom. we might say (“Yes, I freed the bust but I shackled the legs"),43 than the freedom of couturiers themselves, for whom the corset represented an ancient code blocking the imagination of new designs, a framework resistant to sovereign creativity. It is important to emphasize yet again how much haute couture owes the modern cult of individuality. In essence, haute couture substituted a multiplicity of stvles for a uniform cut; it diversified and psychologized dress. It was pervaded bv a utopian vision according to which each woman of taste had to be attired in a distinctive fashion adapted to her own particular “type" and personality.“The high art of dressmaking consists precisely developing the individuality of each woman."4 The diversification of models requires something quite different from the quest for profits. It requires the ideological celebration of the principle of individualism; it requires that full and complete legitimacy he conferred on personalized self-presentation; it requires that originality take precedence over uniformity. True, the creations of haute couture were adopted as class emblems; yet haute couture owes its very existence to the modern individualist ideology that subtended it. That ideology, because it recognized the individual as a virtually absolute value, had a number of repercussions: increased taste for originality, nonconformnism, fantasy, uniqueness of the individual personality, eccentricity, comfort, and bodily display. Only within the framework of this new individualistic configuration could the earlier logic of fashion be destroyed, the logic that had limited originality to the accessories of attire. Haute couture was not the product of a natural evolution; it was not a simple extension of the productive order of ephemera. From the fourteenth century to the mid-eighteenth century. fantasy in fashion was strictly limited in theory and in fact. Subordinated to a general structure of dress that was identical for all women. fanciful innovations were not at all likely to spread. And even when trimmings did come into their own, the architecture of clothing remained uniform. Haute couture, on the contrary, brought about a complete change of direction: overall originality became a requirement, an a priori and ultimate goal: commercial factors alone intervened to put the brakes on the creative imagination. Such a reversal could have come about only in the wake of a revolution in legitimate social representations—the very revolution that recognized the individual as supreme value. Despite its character as a luxury industry aimed at making the social hierarchy visible. then. haute couture was a democratic individualistic organization that adapted the production of fashion to the ideals of the sovereign individual—even though, as was the case for women, that individual remained in a "minor position within the political order. Haute couture was a compromise formation between two ages. On the one hand, it reintroduced the timehonored aristocratie logic of fashion with its luxurious emblems: on the other hand, it orchestrated a modern, diversified production in conformity with the ideological referents of democratic individualism. The values of the individualist age contributed decisively to the orehestration of modern fashion, plaving the same role with respect to fashion that they played with respect to the modern state. In conformity with the principle of equality, in each instance the majestic emblems of hierarchical otherness, both human and political, were repudiated; in each instance, power was increased and bureaucratized, with a growing and penetrating dominion of specialized agencies over society. even while emancipatory values—the principle of the new or the principle of collective sovereignty—were being invoked. What is more, like the democratic state that derived its own legitimacy from its homogeneity with the society it represented and of which it was nothing more than the strict executor, modern couturiers never lost sight of their democratie function as instruments of collective desire. "The truth is that I respond by anticipation to your secret intentions. . . . I am only a medium sensitive to the reactions of your taste and meticulous in registering the trends of your caprices."+5 Unlike artists and the avant-garde that proclaimed their sovereign independence long and loud, haute couture, true to its bureaucratic essence, largely concealed its new power to legislate fashion at a time when it was gaining unprecedented access to powers of initiative, leadership, and stylistic hegemony. 