Meaning Carries On The Bearable Lightness of Meaning: Fashion and Ideology IkE oBJects and mass culture. major discourses about meaning are caught up in the irrepressible logic of novelty, carried away by a turbulence that may not be absolutely identical to fashion in the narrow sense but is nevertheless analogous in principle. The world of consciousness, too. is now ordered by the ephemeral and the superficial: this is the new configuration of democratic societies. It would be patently absurd to claim that the frivolous process has completely taken over intellectual life and that ideological shifts are governed by a gratuitous logic of renewal. However. it can be argued that the fashion process succeeds in annexing even those spheres that are a priori most resistant to the play of fashion. We are not living through the end of ideologies; we are ushering in the era of ideologies recycled as fashion. Never has change in cultural and ideological orientations proceeded so precipitously as it does in our societies; never has it been so dependent on fads. The speed with which frenzies of meaning have come and gone and proliferated over the last two or three decades is particularly striking. On the hit parade of ideas. coming one after another or overlapping, there has been the counterculture movement, antiauthoritarianism, third-worldism. libertarian pedagogy, antipsychiatry, sexual liberation, worker management, consumerism, and ecologv. At the same time, in the more specifically intellectual sphere. France has embraced structuralism, semiology, psychoanalysis, Lacanianism, Althusserism, the philosophies of desire, and the “new philosophy." The ballet continued through the 198os, with the spectacular turnaround of neolibertarianism: the “conservative revolution," the return of the sacred, the ecstasy of “roots," and the glorification of businesses. In the 196os and 197os, the hvpercritical ideology of protest was a big hit, just like the miniskirt or the Beatles. Marx and Freud became superstars and gave rise to floods of ravished exegetes, mimetic discourses, imitators, and readers. And what is left today, in France? In a few short years, the most hallowed references have fallen into oblivion. "Mav '68 is history!" What was once indispensable has become old-fashioned. Not by virtue of a critical movement, but simply through disaffection: one wave ends, another is launched with the same epidemic force. Taken to extremes, this phenomenon leads people to change the way they think just as they change addresses, cars, or spouses. Systems of representation have become consumer objects; they function almost according to the throwaway logic of fads and tissues. One misunderstanding needs to be avoided from the outset. To speak about the fashion process in ideas does not mean that everything floats in a state of absolute nondifferentiation, that collective opinions oscillate from pole to pole without fixed anchor points. Consummate fashion makes sense only in the democratic age where there is consensus and strong. widespread, lasting attachment to the founding values of the modern ideology: equality, freedom, and human rights. The accelerated obsolescence of systems of representation can develop only against the background of the overall stability of modern democracies. Here is the paradox of consummate fashion: whereas democratic society is more and more capricious in its relation to collectively intelligible discourses. at the same time it is more and more balanced, consistent, and firm in its ideological underpinnings. Parodying Nietzsche, one might say that homo democraticus is superficial by way of depth: the securing of the principles of individualist ideology is what allows meanings to enter into their merry dance. No one would claim that fashion is intruding on intellectual life for the very first time. Since the seventeenth century at least, the cultural sphere has been stirred up, in worldly and intellectual circles, by countless "frenzies." and even political views have gone through many eycles of alternation and change. However, if we look closely at the various ideological shifts that repeatedly jolted the democracies through the middle of the twentieth century, we do not find the fashion process at work: the tenor and emotional investment of the ideological formations characteristie of that era preclude the intervention of the fashion form. Republic. nation proletariat, race, socialism, secularism, revolution—these were all sacred terms for the political ideologies that embraced the mission of renewing the world. These ideologies crystallized as dogmas calling for personal devotion and sacrifice. Modern revolutionary discourses, systems for global interpretation of the universe claiming to offer total knowledge of present, past, and future, have reintroduced a certain form of religious faith through their eschatological doctrines, their "scientifie" ambition to articulate and maintain truth and justice with certainty. As "secular religions," they have given rise to militancy and absolute passions, unswerving submission to the correct line, total personal commitment, the gift of believers' lives and subjective individualities. Calling for renunciation of self in favor of revolution, nation. and party, the glorious age of ideologies is completely opposed to fashion and its relativism. Whereas the heroic reign of ideology requires the abnegation of individuality, the reign of fashion rests on the requirement of immediate individual happiness. Whereas ideology generates orthodoxy and scholasticism, fashion is attended bv small individual differences and fluctuating commitments. Ideology is Manichean: it separates good from bad, cleaves society down the middle. and exacerbates social conflicts; fashion pacifies and neutralizes antagonisms. Whatever reversals may have come about in the sphere of political and social thought during the last two centuries, fashion did not succeed until recently in imposing its ephemeral legislation, countered as it was by ideologies with theological pretensions. We have left behind the age of secular prophecy. Within just a few decades. the discourse of radical social change has been largely swept awav. It has lost all its legitimacy and all social moorings. No one believes any longer in the glorious fatherland of socialisn; no one believes in the saving mission of the proletariat and the party; no one militates for the -Great Day" ahead. The historical importance of this debacle of the revolutionary imagination cannot be overstressed. No sooner did eschatological convictions and beliefs in an absolute truth of history begin to crumble than a new regime of "ideologies" came into being: that of fashion. The ruin of Promethean visions opens up an unprecedented relation to values an essentially ephemeral, mobile, unstable ideological space. There are no more megasystems: they have given way to the fluctuation and mutability of trends. Where we used to have faith, we now have infatuation. After the era of intransigent theology comes the era of frivolous meaning: interpretations of the world have shed their former seriousness and taken up the casual intoxication of consumption and express service. And the importance of the ephemeral in the ideological realm is very likely to intensify: in recent years, we have already seen the most politically convinced people make a clean sweep of their views and change direction by 18o degrees. Yesterday's French Marxists are supporters of religion, and the “angry young men" have become apologists for capitalism. The heroes of cultural confrontation have been converted to the cult of the self, and devotees of worker management promote the market economy. We are prepared to adore unconditionally what we were only recently ready to burn. This destabilization does not involve the masses alone; it also affects the political class, as the conservative vogue in the early i98os attested. It is not limited to the average person in the street; it extends to intellectuals as well, as one can see from the repeated gyrations of some of the French intellectual starlets. Mobility of conscience is not an exclusive privilege of our era. What is unique to our era, on the other hand, is the way in which inconstancy has become generalized, virtually systemic: today it is taking over as the dominant “ideological” mode of operation. To be sure, people still believe in causes, but casually, without committing themselves “to the bitter end." No longer inclined to die in great numbers for their ideas, humnan beings in modern democratic societies are always prepared for change; consistency has become old hat. People live less and less according to systems of dominant ideas; like the rest, such systems have been swallowed up by frivolity. Higher goals do not disappear, but they no longer stand out. Of course they are capable of mobilizing the masses on occasion, but indirectly, and in unpredictable ways. like passing flare-ups that are quickly extinguished, replaced by the longer-lasting quest for personal happiness. The dominant trend produces adjustable and expendable plans. A preference for provisional arrangements is winning out over fidelity, superficial commitment over motivation based on belief. We are embarked on an interminable process of desacralization and desubstantialization of meaning that defines the reign of consummate fashion. This is how the gods die: not in a nihilist demoralization of the West and anguish over the loss of values, but in small jolts of meaning. Not in the morosity of Europe, but in the euphoria of fleeting ideas and actions. Not in passive disillusionment, but in hyperanimation and temporary highs. There is no point in weeping over the "death of God\*: God is getting a Technicolor, fast-forward funeral. Far from engendering a will to nothingness, the death of God carries the desire for the new and its excitement to extremes. The new flexibility has to be resituated within the continuity of the dynamics of democracy. By positing the organization of society as dependent on humans and no longer on a sacred agency, the modern ideologies had been the instituting matrixes of our democratic universe. a universe called forth by the will of the collective body alone. But by setting up intransigent dogmas and establishing an ineluctable meaning for history. this process of secularization in a sense stopped in its tracks. lt reintroduced in secular guise the old religious apparatus of human submission to an inaccessible higher principle. The age of fashion represents one more step forward toward the democratic elimination of the intangible and the hieratic. Nothing now requires self-sacrifice; discourses are open to flexible debate, to correction, to the nondisruptive revision of principles. The fashion form reflects the final stage of the democratization of minds and meanings. Beyond fashion's mood shifts, paradoxically, democratie society is digging a homogeneous furrow, pursuing an identical trajectory. One of the limits of the cyclical theory of collective behavior has to do with the way this theory sees the abrupt changes of ideological coordinates as backand-forth movements, pendulum swings between private and public life, as if there is nothing but historical discontinuity, reversals that are always radically opposed to whatever came before. Now if we consider the oscillations that have taken place over the past three decades, we are obliged to note that. despite these reversals, a single historical dynamic turns out, paradoxically, to be at work. To be sure, on the surface the utopian wave of the 196os is in total contrast to our disillusioned, pragmatist, corporatist moment; an era of public commitment is radically distinct from an era defined by its hyperindividualistic preoccupations, no matter what partial social conflicts may erupt here and there. However, can the counterculture or the events of May 1968 be seen as anything but waves of transpolitical individualist clains?² Can radical feminism be seen as anything but a movement allowing women to claim new freedoms? The ideology of protest brandished the banner of revolution, but one of its mainsprings was the individualist goal of living freelv, unhampered by organizations or conventions. This ideology helped in its own way to highlight the forward march of democratic individualisın and to topple a certain number of ponderous. repressive frameworks that had been resistant to personal autonomy. There is not an irreducible gap between that moment and the present one: they represent nothing but two different paths along a single trajectory. that of the conquest of individuality. Today, the emphasis on personal values and even the return of a certain moral conservatism are pursuing the same historical effort to conquer autonomy in other ways. As soon as the reference points of dogmatic progressivism are blurred and new antinomic references are promoted, community pressures become weaker and less homogeneous: what is correct becomes less clear; the gamut of individual choice broadens, and the possibility of variegating the values that orient our lives increases as well. Reason has its ruses: yesterday the ideology of the Left served the historical progress of individualism; today the values of order and business are playing the same role in their turn, almost in spite of themselves. Their manifest reversals notwithstanding. temporary ideologies do not disrupt the age-old continuity of the democracies; rather, they accelerate its progress. The fashion regime of collective representations did not replace the era of Promethean ideologies all at once. There was a turning point, a critical moment that functioned as a compromise formation between the historical phase of the revolution and the phase of consummate fashion. The last manifestation of the revolutionary spirit turned out to be curiously combined, in the 196os, with its counterpart, the fashion spirit. On the one hand, the 196os and their aftermath reintroduced the imaginary realm of revolution, through student demonstrations, the counterculture, radical feminism. and alternative movements. We saw the unfolding of an ideological escalation summoning us to change our lives, to destroy the hierarchical and bureaucratic organization of capitalist society, to free ourselves from all forms of domination and authority. With the evocation of the police state and the bosses' state, the return to general strikes, the “Internationale" and the barricades, the revolutionary mythology succeeded in refurbishing its coat of arms. On the other hand, the confrontations of the 196os for the most part broke off the essential links that had connected that mythology with the demiurgic projects of building a new world that were crystallized in the nineteenth century. May 1968 in this respect constitutes an unprecedented moment: without any definite goal or program, the movement was an insurrection without a future, a revolution in the present tense attesting simultaneously to the decline of eschatologies and to the protesters' inability to offer a clear view of the society to come. Without an explicit project, subtended by a spontaneous ideology. May 1968 was just a short-lived parenthesis, a frivolous revolution, an infatuation with Revolution rather than a fundainental mobilization. It offered the spectacle of revolution, a joyous affirmation of revolutionary signs. not revolutionary stakes and confrontations. Unlike the bloody revolutions that had focused on the deliberate construction of a different future. May 1968 was organized around the temporal axis of fashion—the present—in a “happening" that looked more like a big party than like the days that shook the world. The springtime of the students did not make serious proposals or build anything lasting. It criticized and palavered: it brought people together in the streets and universities; it upset certainties: it called for "the rebellion of life," for "everything, all at once." for the total fulfillment of individuals as opposed to organizations and bureaucracies. The idea was to explode instituted hierarchies in order to live unhampered in the here and now: May 1968 was subtended by a libertarian individualist. hedonist, and communicational ideology at the opposite pole from the self-abnegation of earlier revolutions. The collective and subjective present was the leading temporal pole of May 1968. This was the first fashion revolution: frivolity won out over tragedy. and history espoused play. May 1968 mobilized revolutionary passions more on the surface than in depth. In parodying revolution, May 1968 did less to reignite the age-old flames than to carry to its apotheosis, briefly. the fashion of protest. The ideological climate of the times played a preponderant role in the rise of the protest phenomenon in France. Neither the students objective situation nor the deterioration of their job prospects or future outlook can account for the youthful utopian rebellion. In May 1968, no one was really worrying about the future; the students gave very little thought to the value of their diplomas. Quite the contrary: they rejected the adaptation of university instruction to the needs of the capitalist economy. The employment crisis had not yet sunk in. The spirit of May 1968 did not result from a social inclination to worry; it resulted above all from ideological inclinations, intellectual fashions, among a particular age group: social criticism was "in," as were revolutionary attitudes, Marxism, and anticapitalism, at the very moment when the real revolutionary perspective embodied in the party and the working class were disappearing. The vogue for revolution evolved as a counterpart to the decomposition of the French Communist party and the integration of the working class to neocapitalism. This vogue managed to attract a lot of attention precisely because it was discredited among the masses and their protest organizations, because it was able to serve the voung as a sign of affirmation, a spectacle of visible difference. The intellectual break was of course particularly evident in hyperpoliticized leftist groups. but in fact radical ideas were more or less widespread in very broad layers of the student movement. Police efforts to suppress the student movement contributed to student espousal of the anticapitalist ideology that was more or less in favor, and led to the propagation of the protest phenonenon. While they do not account for everything, radical chic and hypercritical conformity among young people are crucial to an understanding of the breadth and contagiousness of the spirit of May 1968. Other cultural factors also played major roles in developing the spirit of protest. No circumstantial or structural explanation (the war in Vietnam, a centralizing and dominating state, the archaic nature of the university, the Gaullist regime in France) can account for a phenomenon that touched young people (in a variety of ways. to be sure—there were the hippies, the counterculture. the psychedelic movement, the provos, May 1968, the alternative movements. feminism, gay liberation), but that affected all the advanced democratic societies. The uprisings of the 196os can be related to the increase in school populations, the fact that students stayed in school longer. the fact that teenagers and postadolescents led lives without responsibility. separated from the real world of work. But each of these factors was important only within the broader framework in which the new fashion organization of society was overturning the values of everyday life. At the heart of the individualism of protest, there is the empire of fashion as the springboard of individualist demands, of the appeal for personal freedom and fulfillment. The hedonist age of fashion and the cult of personal developimnent that it inspires were vectors of the upheaval of the 196os and early 1970s, an upheaval that came about among young people because that group was less subject to the older forms of socialization, because it had assimilated the new standards for living one's life more rapidly, more directly, and more intensely than other groups. Hedonist individualism bumped headlong into archaic, authoritarian frameworks for socialization; it was this antagonism between a culture centered on the values of fashion and a managerial society, a culturally blocked society, that fed the trend toward protest. At the deepest level, what was at stake was a revolt aimed at harmonizing and unifying a culture with its own new basic principles. This was not a “crisis of civilization," but a collective effort to draw society away from the rigid cultural norms of the past and give birth to more a supple, more varied, more individualistic society that would conform to the requirements of consummate fashion. Revolutionary discourse has lost its attraction today. Eschatological narratives have lost their shock value; we are firmly ensconced in the terminal reign of the fashion of meaning. The disaffection with ideological odysseys and its corollary, the advent of "light" meaning. result not so much from a collective awareness of the totalitarianism of the Communist revolution, the inferno of the Gulag, than from the changes that have occurred within the Western world as it has been won over by the process of consummate fashion. The ludic-aesthetic-hedonistic-psvchologistic lifestyle celebrated by the media is what undermined the revolutionary utopia and discredited discourse on behalf of a classless society and a harmonious future. The consummate-fashion system fosters the cult of individual health and life in the here and now; it holds sacred the personal happiness of individuals and the pragmatism of attitudes: it destroys class solidarities and consciousness in favor of explicitly individualistic demands and preoccupations. The empire of seduction has been a euphoric gravedigger for the great ideologies. Taking into account neither the singular individual nor the requirement of freedom to live hic et nunc. those ideologies found themselves poles apart from contemporary individualist aspirations. The fluidity of meaning inherent in our societies is matched by more or less pronounced concerns about the vitality of the democracies. Stripped of belief in great causes, indifferent to major projects of collective edification, are not denocracies highly fragile, vulnerable to threats from without, haunted by the spirit of capitulation? Under the reign of fashion. militant fervor is quenched: might not this phenomenon. under some circumstances, foster the establishment of dictatorial regimes? What becomes of the spirit of freedom, courage in the face of danger, or the mobilization of energies in a society that lacks higher goals. that is obsessed with the quest for personal happiness? These questions cannot be ignored. but it is illegitimate to draw hasty conclusions about the degeneration of the democratie spirit, a spirit gone soft owing to the flabbiness of citizens convictions. One may well wonder whether, today, people would be ready to die in large numbers for the institutions of the republic: but once the question has been raised, how can one reasonably go further? No one can give a serious answer to the sort of question that situates us in a catastrophic scenario with necessarily unprecedented features. Has the will to fight been snuffed out by the cult of the self? If we look at the profile of contemporary society, we find nothing that authorizes us to answer categorically in the affirmative. 'The rout of heroic ideologies does not lead to generalized cowardice, to the paralysis of the citizenry and the rejection of war. Military service does not arouse enthusiasm, but it does not generate any movement toward collective refusal; except for extreme pacifists, the principles of armed defense, a credible dissuasive force, and the reinforcement of military potential are challenged by no one. While the democratic states, with the support of their own populations, continue to arm themselves, pursuing their military-industrial course, civil society for its part manifests collective calm and remarkable firmness of opinion in view of the expansion of terrorism. The temptation to give in to terrorist blackmail is rejected by the majority. despite the threats that weigh on public tranquillity; judges willing to pronounee a severe verdict against the head of a terrorist organization despite the risks have been widely welcomed by society and the political class. Homo democraticus does not dream of heroic sacrifice and an impressive show of weapons, to be sure; still, he does not fall into the cowardice and unconsciousness of capitulation and the immediate present. Terrorist violence has to be answered with strength and the enforcement of laws: threats by foreign nations have to be answered with the reinforcement of military might. Without enthusiasm but with lucidity. contemporary individuals have adopted the old adage: “If you want peace, you must prepare for war." The withering away of hard-line ideological choices is not the same thing as the advent of the spirit of surrender and collective lack of foresight: moreover. it reinforces the social legitimacy of democratic institutions. Apart from tiny terrorist groups with far-out views rejected by all political formations. the democracies no longer harbor within themselves any unconditional adversaries. This is an entirely new situation: revolutionary parties no longer have any impact whatever. In a more relativist world, lacking any ardent historical faith, respect for institutions wins out over subversion; political violence makes no new converts and becomes illegitimate in the eyes of the community; in Western Europe, appeals to bloodshed and physical violence are rejected by the social and political bodv. Critics endlessly find things to criticize in our societies, and in the end they take a certain satisfaction in doing so: for the first time since the advent of the democratic age, human beings have no more social utopias; they no longer dream of a different society. On the surface, the twists and turns of fashion destabilize the democracies; at a deeper level, they settle them down, make them more stable and more resistant to holy wars, less threatened from within, less vulnerable to the hysterical delirium of total mobilization. What we are seeing, then, is not the decline of the democratic spirit but its advance. The gentle drift of meaning is accompanied, to be sure, by a process in which the political is made more spectacular and more trivial, in which militancy and labor-union memberships decline, in which the spirit of citizenship is inflected toward consumerism, in which the public is less involved in the election process and sometimes disaffectedso many revealing aspects of a crisis of homo democraticus. ideally conceived. Yet we can hardly fail to see at the same time that the dissolving of ideologies and the dream of consummate fashion go hand in hand with a more autonomous civil society, one that is more mobilized around what touches it to the quick: women's rights, the environment, education. On the one hand, there is less and less religious commitment to political causes; on the other, there are more "social conflicts" attesting that civil society is not so passive as some make it out to be, that it intervenes more directly and spontaneously in matters involving the lives of individuals and families. Less boxed in by ponderous dogmas. more mobile. more attached to the quality of life and individual freedoms, society is freer to intervene, more able to bring pressure to bear on the state. more apt to express its hopes outside the traditional political parties and lahor unions. The loss of faith in ideologies that characterizes our era leads to more open conflicts, to a greater involvement on the part of citizens with their own immediate affairs, to a less arrogant wielding of power on the part of electoral majorities. Society makes itself increasingly heard. and public power has to learn to imagine solutions that are less technocratic and more flexible, less authoritarian and more diversified. in harinony with the contem porary open individualistic world. ## The Thrill of the Comeback But let us consider the great ideological shift that is taking place in France before our very eyes. In a few short years, the Marxist paradigm has given way to the libertarian paradigm; the opposition to capitalism has vielded to the consecration of free enterprise and the limitation of state power. After the great nay-saying, there is the ecstasy of profit. Yesterday. utopias were in the air; today, there is pragmatism and managerial realism. 'The rehabilitation of competitive individualist values is a corollary of the ideological promotion of economic competition. As ambition, effort. and money take on enhanced prestige, the end of the "68 recess" is being proclaimed; educational institutions are being denounced as increasingly flabby and subject to pedagogical ideology. Merit, excellence. and individual competence are winning out; after the euphoria of the counterculture and relationships, the global pendulum has swung back to efficiency. Nevertheless. the neolibertarian wave is clearly a long way from carrying the day without false notes. If private enterprise and decreased state intervention are unquestionably in favor, this in no way prevents the social body, even in the United States, from supporting systems of social proteetion, social policies established within the framework of the welfare state. Distaste for state interventionism in economie matters in no way undermines the collective attachment to social justice, to establishing protections against major risks, to state intervention in social matters and even in university affairs, as recent student movements in France and Spain have shown. Entrepreneurial dynamism may be celebrated, but large numbers of people manifest their attachment to acquired benefits and a salary scale based on seniority. The will to restore the authority of teachers and of knowledge itself does not undermine the importance of the relational dimension and the need to take subjective motives into consideration in the pedagogical realm. Fashion has its extremes, but in its social diffusion it smoothes over the most pronounced wrinkles; it reconstitutes itself heterogeneously: it gives up all doctrinal character in order to achieve. de facto. a certain "continuity in change," a more rapid transformation of the collective body that still will not disrupt the great equilibriums of democratic societies. The current neolibertarian trend is much more a fashion than a hardline ideological credo: the attraction of the new and the image of privacy are more seductive than the libertarian political program. Like any fashion, this one will secrete its own antitheses. No doubt, after a while, we shall see new enthusiasm for the state and even for the rationality of the universal: we shall have new waves of protesters, hirsute or not, along with romantic utopias at war with the world of money, hierarchy, and work. As soon as the theological age of ideologies ended, we were consigned to a chronic instability of values. to the ebb and flow of actions and reactions, to the "eternal return" of fashion, which keeps on recycling the old forms and values in modern guise. In the 198os, France resonates to the sound of high-tech modernism and a backward-looking mongrel competitiveness; but for how long? This moment can be described as one of the cycles of modern history characterized by overinvolvement in private affairs, in contrast with an earlier phase of attachment to the public sphere. A shift with respect to the public/private axis has in fact occurred; a new privatizing cycle is under way, after the various collective engagements of the i96os and the early 197os. The question is whether such a fluctuation can be understood, even partially. as a disappointment resulting from participation in public actions.3 Through its stress on the role of dissatisfaction and personal frustration, Albert Hirschman's analysis accounts for the abruptness of the collective reversals we have witnessed, over and beyond the consideration of contingent objective factors and “rational actors." At the same time, this analvsis makes clear how much changes in preference owe to the inconstancy and frivolity of human motivations: in a sense, the logic of fashion underlies this theory of ideological and social oscillations. But the importance attributed to disappointment is highly overestimated; as it happens, that particular disappointment has little explanatory value in the cycle that concerns us. Today, those who have been disappointed by the revolutionary mobilization are not the only ones who put their hopes in the private sphere; in a general way, the entire social body does the same—the silent majority itself, which has been quite apathetic politically for decades. This apathy has nothing to do with the disappointment provoked by actions taken in the public interest; it has been a long time since the masses played an active role in the great eschatological struggles and clung to the hope of changing the world. The same people who vaguely condemned capitalism and its excesses without being politically committed themselves have come to the point of revising their judgments in favor of free enterprise. What we are seeing is not disappointment. but the invincible attraction of the new. The current shift has less to do with the experience of dissatisfaction than with the ruin of the great ironclad ideologies: it has less to do with frustration than with the frenzy of change and the passion for all that exalts free individuals. Without the seductive power of novelty, the new libertarian ideas would never have won such a large audience so rapidly. The cultural promotion of free enterprise came about not only by way of realism in relation to the economic crisis. but also through the spirit of fashion. Although it is in part a fashion, the new entrepreneurial culture still produces fundamental and presumably lasting changes in individual and collective behavior. With the change in the social image of business. the latter becomes less a place of exploitation and class struggle than a place of creation of wealth that calls for more widespread participation. In the Europe of the 198os, the figure of the profiteer boss is yielding on a broad scale to that of the creator and hero-star of business. Labor unions are starting to take this change of climate into account in their language and practices: worker management looks like a has-been: capitalism is no longer evil incarnate; strikes are becoming weapons whose use is sometimes problematie. At the same time, the taste for enterprise is spreading and winning new social legitimacy. 'The winners' turn has come—the photogenic bosses, the yuppies. Here is a crucial ideological updating for the free societies that, having shed their image as inveterate exploiters, find themselves endowed with strengthened legitimaey and a culture at least theoretically favorable to a more realistie participation on the part of wage earners and to a process of conflictual cooperation in businesses. A shift in ideological coordinates of this nature cannot leave the subjective sphere itself unchanged; it is carried away by new goals and meanings. We are far removed from the culture of marginal dissidence. We are now worrying about the future: effort, courage, and risk have returned to center stage: emulation, professionalism, and excellence are extolled. Still. does this new cultural environment toll the death knell of the narcissistic profile of contemporary personalities? The spirit of competition and ambition have been rehabilitated, and there is a consensus about business: is this not a new configuration incompatible with the reign of the self-absorbed ego. preoccupied with its own intimate sensations and well-being? In one sense, a page is about to be turned. Laxity, permnissiveness, and scattershot popular psychology have all had their day; an entire sector of "cool" culture is being overtaken by referents that are more “serious," more responsible, more productive. But psychologizing individualism has not succumbed: it has recycled itself by integrating the new thirst for busi ness, software, media, and advertising. A new narcissistic generation is on the move, in the grip of a frenzy for computers, productivity, business, and the image-meter. Not only are the pop-psychology cult, the idolatry of the body and of personal autonomy more active than ever, but the original, historically unique interhuman relation instituted by the second individualist revolution is being perpetually recuperated. To be sure, we are undergoing a meritocratic reaction: to be sure, the taste for success, competition and business is returning at full strength. But how is this moment to be interpreted? Not at all as a classic reinvestment in hierarchical values and the primacy of other-directed criteria, but much more fundamentally as the pursuit, through other means, of the properly narcissistic process of reduction—which does not mean abolition—of the subjective dependence on collective criteria of social respectability. At the heart of what constitutes contemporary individualism, there is a new structure of interpersonal relations in which the ego wins out over social recognition, in which the individual quest for happiness and self-expression displaces the ageold primacy of the judgment of others (as reflected in concern with honor, conspicuous consumption, social standing, and so on). Far from being abolished, this shifting of the social relation among human beings pursues its own dynamic. It is simplistic to suppose that we are simply witnessing a comeback of competitive ideology. of the frenzied quest for success and social status: the new spirit of the times is simply getting on with the task of emancipating individuals with respect to the collective reference points of social success and the approval of others. Even the craze for media recognition that henceforth drives artists, journalists, writers, bosses, and everyone else must not be understood as signaling the primacy of an obsession with others, but much more as autopublicity, the narcissistic pleasure of appearing on the screen, of being seen by as many people as possible. Media exposure satisfies the desire to be loved and to please more than the desire to be respected and admired for one's works. Narcissus is more eager to seduce than to be respected; he wants to be talked about, wants people to care about himn, wants to be fussed over. As Patrick Poivre d'Arvor has declared to a major daily newspaper: “I need to be loved." It is once again respectable to earn money and social success, but the psychological mainsprings of these activities have little to do with the desire to rise in the social hierarchy, to hoist oneself up above others, to be envied, to win respectability. Ambition itself is caught up in the vertigo of intimate subjectivity: business offers as much a way to establish an economically comfortable place for oneself as a means for realizing one's own potential and outdoing oneself, a way to have a challenging goal in life. The narcissistic structure of the ego dominates: it is a matter on the one hand of having enough money to enjoy the goods and services of modern life in private, and on the other hand of doing something by and for oneself, of experiencing the excitement of adventure and risk. Competition has taken on a new tonality: it no longer connotes the effort to “make it," but rather a narcissism more attentive to oneself and one's intimate resonances than to social posturing, rank. and prestige. There is no rift between the new entrepreneurial cult and the multiple passions of individuals for writing, music, or dance: self-expression. "creativity," “in-depth participation" of the self prevail everywhere. In an increasing number of cases, people in business. the liberal professions. and others change their professional activities, not because their "career profiles" are blocked, but because as individuals they are not fulfilling themselves as they would like. The neonarcissistic age implies the subordination of the forms of competition to desires for personal accomplishment. The other is less an obstacle or an enemy than a springboard to being oneself. True, individuals measure themselves against one another. assert themselves individually in comparison with others: still, this does not mean that a new cycle is simply replacing hedonistic individualism. It is the very same process of narcissistic privatization that is widening the frontiers; the ego is becoming more and more the master of interpersonal competition, as in certain sports (footraces, nontournament tennis) in which competition with others is above all a way of relaxing. staying in shape, challenging oneself, or setting a personal record The neolibertarian vogue warrants our attention. How could free enterprise, which French intellectuals have denounced for so long. have won their hearts in such a short time? How can we explain the cultural reversal in favor of profit and markets? How, in a nation like France, so inclined for so long to the protective centralism of publie power, could a movement like the disengagement of the state have come about? We know that, in the French case, the socialist experience of the early 98os contributed more than a little to this shift. In particular, it revealed the limits of state action in an economy involved in the international market; it exposed constraints on the economy and the reality of international economic links; it undermined leftist dreams by putting into action, after an initial start-up phase a pragmatic style of business management. Beyond the political alternation of right and left, the context of economic crisis was crucial. Its first quite concrete impact came through the continued growth of obligatory payroll deductions: what appeared to be a means of protection, a guarantee of freedom and well-being, began to look to some like an obstacle to autonomy and individual responsibility. The increase in taxes and social contributions ceased to be taken for granted; they gave rise to the feeling that we were forging nations of welfare clients, immature democracies. At an even deeper level, the economic crisis was a pedagogical instrument converting minds to reality, making utopian visions and miraculous solutions by the all-purpose state obsolete. Lingering unemployment, zerogrowth rates, industrial weakness, loss of competitiveness, deficits in the balance of pavments—the new econonic configuration led belatedly to an awareness that the European nations were running out of steam, and needed to acquire the means to emerge from the crisis state. This new configuration is at the root of the cultural promotion of the entrepreneur, the emphasis on risk and individual merit as means of giving our societies a new lease on life and opening up opportunities for the future. Whatever their importance, all these factors could come into play only because they were grafted onto the transformations of values and lifestyles that belong to the age of consummate fashion. By hyperindividualizing human beings. by developing the taste for personal autonomy, by privileging the registering of facts. the reign of objects and information led to a valorization of everything that relates to freedom and individual responsibility. The neolibertarian vogue is in part an ideological adaptation to ways of life that center on the independent individual unit, an entity resistant to omniscient systems, to intrusive, homogeneous, directive frameworks. It is impossible to separate the consensus over profit and enterprise from the action that characterizes the generalized fashion system, a system that continues to promote individual autonomy, as we have seen, and to uproot dogmatic eschatological beliefs. In the era of protest, individualist claims had free rein to denounce the bureaucratic capitalist system and to espouse revolutionary radicalism; this era constituted an intermediate phase between a militant revolutionary age and an age of individualism absorbed first and foremost in private preoccupations. Consummate fashion has pursued its course: the narcissistic individualism that governs us, hostile to great prophecies and fond of hyperreality, has been fertile ground for the libertarian renaissance. The requirement of flexibility, the moves to denationalize and deregulate, echo the transformations of individuality itself: it has become flexible, pragmatic, and eager above all for personal autonomy. Alongside this second libertarian wave, various conservative manifestations are unfolding, reflecting just as spectacular a reversal of values. The ideology of law and order has the wind in its sails at the moment: in France, public opinion is running in favor of the death penalty, and many states in the United States have already reenacted and implemented it. As far as French prisons are concerned, there is less and less emphasis on rehabilitation and social reinsertion; we are told that we have had enough soft" prisons and lax justice, that we have to punish with a firm hand, that we have to reestablish mandatory sentences. In England, there are threats to restore physical punishment. “Therapeutic injunctions" for drug addicts and penalties for substance abuse have been advocated. Numerous associations such as Pro-Life or Laissez-les-virre (Let them live) are crusading for the abolition of legal abortion. In the United States. attacks on abortion clinics are increasing, and since 1977 it has not been possible to pay for voluntary abortions with public funds. Leading political figures in France as well as in America have declared that legalized abortion must be brought to an end. A new moral order is struggling to take hold: the slogan “work, family, fatherland" is coming back. After the frenzy of sexual liberation and women's liberation, we now hear praise for chastity, for virginity, occasionally for the role of woman as housewife: contraception is stigmatized, while AIDS appears as a sign of divine wrath. and intolerant statements against homosexuality are heard more often in some contexts. More troubling still, racist and xenophobic themes are popping up shamelessly in public places. In France, people express doubts about the Holocaust; attacks on foreigners are increasing: parties of the extreme right do well in elections with slogans like "France to the French: foreigners out." The antiauthoritarian and emancipatory climate of the 196os and 197os is behind us; conservatism is front-page news. Can all these disparate phenomena—which nevertheless signal an unmistakable ideological reversal—be taken as manifestations of generalized fashion? Are we not witnessing an authentic conservative and moralistic comeback after the exacerbated cultural liberalism of recent vears? Is this not the very sign of fashion's eternal return, the alternation of old and new, the recycling of the past, the alternating cycle of neo and retro? The analogy is misleading: at its core, what is sometimes called the "conservative revolution" is antithetical to the spirit and logic of fashion. While consummate fashion functions according to a logie of hedonism, seduction, and novelty, neoconservatism rehabilitates moralism, repression, and tradition. 'The process under way opposes the frivolous order to the moral order. Whereas the fashion form treats the individual subjective choice as god, conservative rigorism attempts to crush diversity and freedom of choice. Fashion is fed by the insatiable desire for novelty; neoconservatism is rooted in dogma. Fashion responds to the taste for change; the new moral order is a response to the anxieties produced by physical, economic, and cultural insecurity. Fashion exalts the present; the Moral Majority is nostalgic for a past order. Conservatives are carrying out a rigorous offensive in the area of morality; they are directing it explicitly, moreover, against hypermodernism and the laxity of the fashion spirit, which they accuse of having destroyed the values of effort, family, religion, work, and patriotism. What we are witnessing, in France and in the United States. is a reaction against permissive morality, against the destruction of authority and the family, against racial mixing and national suicide," against Western "decadence," which is blamed on the unbridled reign of total fashion. The desire for security aside, the rise of the Moral Majority in the United States is primarily the effect of a religious fundamentalism that consummate fashion has not succeeded in eradicating. The Moral Majority is not so much a fashion effect as an intolerant religious remnant, not so much an essential feature of contemporary democracies as a manifestation characteristic of nations in which fundamentalist groups and churches proliferate. Such groups have been able to win back their audience owing precisely to the earlier emancipatory tidal wave, the disintegration of social identities. and the individual and collective anxiety that disintegration generates. This neoconservatism does not reflect the flexible reign of consummate fashion: it reintroduces the hyperorthodox religious spirit of another age, in that it does not recognize the free action and judgment of private persons. Fashion's empire has not yet reached the end of its course. It has unearthed a number of cleavages, and in a few short years it has unleashed an unparalleled set of individualist claims. In societies in which the puritan sentiment is deeply rooted, the fashion process has come into conflict with intransigent faith and convictions that it has not managed to shake. Still. we should not be too quick to invoke a religious absolute impervious to worldly concerns: we must take the times into account, and we must acknowledge that the cultural effects of the wider fashion are only a few decades old. Let us not invoke, either, the omnipotent power of fashion's reign: there is nothing to suggest that it will ever succeed in changing the world of our beliefs into a realm of the consumable and the changeable. It is reasonable to suppose only that, because of the irreversible dynamics of fashion, fundamentalism will be less and less widely shared, less and less dominant in the modern democracies. However, there are no guarantees that it will ever disappear. Although it cannot be identified as a form of infatuation, the rigorist and authoritarian phase is not unrelated to consummate fashion. In search of novelty, the media have powerfully inflated the traditionalist comeback, as if public opinion had suddenly switched sides. We know that this is not the case. At issue is more a pseudo-event than a basic cultural reality; in this respect, the “return to values" effect is inseparable from the media and at the same time, paradoxically, from fashion—even as it sets itself up to challenge fashion. All the polls point in the same direction: the passion for autonomy and the desire for personal pleasure keep on growing. Family values may be invoked, but the divorce rate keeps on rising and the birthrate continues to drop. People are getting married later and later in life, and in smaller and smaller numbers. In France, one child in five is now born out of wedlock. The decline of permissive sexuality may be announced, but in high schools in Paris one of every two boys is sexually active, and one girl in three is no longer a virgin; the overwhelming majority of high school students think that contraception and free adolescent sexuality are legitimate. The public is hostile to abortion? In the United States, the mnajority is opposed to prohibiting it bv law, and in France. 30 percent of the right-wing National Front party voters are in favor of maintaining the right to abortion. Religious fundamentalism is on the rise in Western deimnocracies? To suppose so is to fail to note that the practices and beliefs of a majority of believers are increasinglv free. eclectic. and individualized. It is to forget that the phenomenon is developed by means of televangelism, Christian video advertising, Christian theme parks with laser shows, pools where you can swim in the daytime and get baptized at night. The phenomenon has many superficial echoes in the media. but few on the broad social scale: is this not in itself one of the characteristic features of fashion? A society restructured by the fashion form by no means keeps rigorist values out of the spotlight--but we have to recognize that the phenomenon remains a spectacle. Its effects may be non-negligible. but they are skin-deep and confined to a minority. Like neopuritanism, claims and demands for security cannot be considered fashion movements. Restoration of the death penalty. stricter justice. identity checks in public streets, restriction of the right of exile. nationality codes—none of these manifestations has anything to do with the ephemeral fluctuations of fashion. The polls are unanimous: the struggle against criminality and the desire for personal security head the list of public preoccupations. We have not seen the last of the demands for law and order: this is because, at the deepest level, what is at issue is not an ideology but an unavoidable component of an orderly individualist society restructured by the fashion form. In a hyperindividualist society in which socialization excludes physical violence and cruelty, in which diverse populations meet. in which communication takes the place of repression and in which publie order is very broadly assured, fear is part and parcel of the pacific, unarmed individual. Anxiety about personal safety is not a passing fancy; in a way. it is an invariant of democratic life. Tocqueville had already stressed this point: if democratie man has a natural taste for freedom, he has a still more ardent passion for publie order; he is always ready, in difficult circumstances, to give up his own rights to stifle the seeds of disorder: "The taste for public tranquillity then becomes a blind passion, and the citizens are liable to conceive a most inordinate devotion to order."+ Even as it is being inscribed in the prolongation of this democratic trend. the present moment nevertheless manifests a singular characteristic: in effect, citizens are demanding both more security in their everyday lives and more individual freedom. Thev want increased public order with no decrease in individual rights. Still, the desire for security does not have as its counterpart a willingness to give up political and personal freedoms, as Tocqueville feared it would. We are not witnessing the beginning of a trend toward restricting individual rights and increasing state prerogatives; instead we are seeing the crystallization of a heightened demand for public control and protection at the heart of a society profoundly attached to individual and democratic freedoms. Just as security measures do not stem from a constituted ideology, the resurgence of xenophobia is not inscribed within the continuity of classic racist ideology. Today, the very citizens whose attitudes toward darkskinned people are least welconing no longer advocate the destruction of the other: they no longer proclaim the unchallenged superiority of the Aryan or the Westerner. However many racist crimes there may be in Western Europe. and there are too many, the phenomenon remains circumscribed: we no longer see pogroms, massacres, or systematic rape. Racism no longer has the virulence it once had; it is much more contained, less aggressive. Many people dislike foreigners; few approve of bloodshed. Thev avoid making contact, but they do not commit aggressive acts. The frivolous age does not eliminate racism, but it modifies some of its features. No one imagines a "final solution" any longer; no one supports the proposition that populations of color are genetically inferior. Western Europe has left the thematics of racial purity behind; contemporary xenophobia develops on the terrain of the obsession with personal security and the protection of personal interests. In France, racism is going the way of other ideologies: it is less heavily freighted with meaning; it has become less sure of itself, less dominant. "postideological," more an expression of individual anxiety than of a Manichean world view. It is hardly necessary to specify that racism has not shifted, for all that—to say the least—into the casual world of fashion. ## Do-It-Yourself Enlightenment Although the new social regulation of meaning is not antithetical to the stable operation of democratic institutions, it does pose one thorny problem concerning the democratic ideal of subjective autonomy in the realm of opinion. Can we really speak of individual freedom where the life of the mind resonates to the rhythm of changing moods in fashion? If ideas oscillate with every capricious shift in fads, if we regularly adopt the “in" trends, what becomes of the democratic individualist goal par excellence: personal sovereignty or self-determination in the order of thought? The question is a crucial one, as Tocqueville recognized. Tocqueville's nuanced pessimism regarding the future of democracies is well known: as equality of conditions advances, the yoke of habit and collective prejudice weakens, benefiting independence of mind and individual reasoning. However, even as individuals are led to rely increasingly on their own understanding, a counterforce develops that leads them to trust public opinion. On the one hand, individuals strive increasingly to seek truth in themselves; on the other hand, they are increasingly inclined to follow the majority verdict unquestioningly. In democracies, the action of ordinary opinion on isolated individuals has a new and incomparable power: it exerts itself as fashion, not through coercion but through the invisible pressure of numbers. Taken to the extreme, democratic epochs may bring about “the absolute power of a majority" and may induce people to "give up thinking at all, thus extinguishing intellectual freedom." We can hardly fail to share Tocqueville's concern today, given the media's impact. the cult of best-sellers, the esoteric gurus, the entertainment programs. the proliferation of one-minute stars and of intellectual and ideological fashions. Yet however ambiguous the frivolous economy of meaning may be. it hardly seems justifiable to represent it as an enterprise tending to eradicate individual freedom or as a sign of an increasing subjugation of hunan minds. Actually, the acceleration and proliferation of fashionable conformities are fostering a partial but effective autonomy of minds: the epidemics of mimesis produce progress toward greater individualization of thought. People take pleasure today in denouncing the sheeplike mind lessness of our contemporaries, their absence of reflection. their unfortunate tendency to be inconsistent and to go off on tangents. Still. we can hardly argue that minds were freer when religions and traditions attempted to produce a seamless homogeneity of collective beliefs, when the great messianic ideologies imposed dogmatic doctrines with no room for individual critical examination. lt is easy to see what has been lost: today. convictions are less assured, there is less personal resistance to the seduetion of the new and of majority opinion. It is harder to pinpoint what has been gained in the same process: people are more prepared to raise questions in the absence of preconceived answers, and they are more comfortable calling themselves into question as well. Under the reign of total fashion, the mind is less firmly made up than before, but more receptive to criticism; it is less stable but more tolerant; less sure of itself but more open to difference, more receptive to evidence and to the arguments of others. To identify consummate fashion with an unparalleled process of standardization and depersonalization is to take a superficial view; in reality, consumiate fashion is the driving force behind a more insistent questioning, a multiplication of subjective viewpoints, a decrease in the similarity of small personal visions. The great ideological certainties are giving way before an explosion of individual microdifferences, subjective singularities that may not be very original, creative, or reflective but that are more numerous and more flexible than before. In the hollow space left by the collapse of catechisms and orthodoxies, fashion opens the way to the proliferation of subjective opinions. Nothing would be farther off the mark than to represent fashion with the features of an intellectual unanimity. Let us look at the current infatuation with libertarianism and a reduced role for the state: far from being reflected in a homogeneous discourse, it is accompanied by a whole range of variants and adaptations, from neolibertarians to social democrats by way of neoconservatives and various others. Virtually all intellectual groupings, in varying degrees, share the infatuation of the moment, but none of them uses it in precisely the same way. A few vears earlier. the same thing happened with revolutionary Marxist thought, which gave rise to a torrent of interpretations and combinations: spontaneism. self-management, Maoism, Freudo-Marxism, marginal utopia, structuralist Marxism, theoretical antihumanism, and so on. Fashion is a do-it-vourself enterprise in which individuals concoct for themselves a more or less made-to-order intellectual universe consisting of assorted borrowings and reactions to one thing and another. Our societies are committed to the flowering of small and large differences of opinion; individual consciousnesses, far from being homogenized by fashion, are being carried away in a process of broadened differentiation, of à la carte intellectual tinkering. Progress is a term that is somewhat out of fashion today. However, we must not hesitate to reactivate the notion, even if by doing so we engage in head-on confrontation with thinking shaped by the posterity of Marx and Nietzsche. Yes. there is progress in freedom of thought, even despite the mimicry and conformity of fashion. Yes, the forward movement of enlightenment is continuing: people “as a whole,"” as Kant would say, continue to emerge from their status as “minors." In advanced democracies, ideological fanaticism is becoming extinct; traditions are coming undone; a passion for information is moving to the foreground. Individuals are increasingly capable of examining issues freely; they are less influenced by collective discourse, better able to use their own intellectual resources, to "think for themselves"—which obviously does not mean they are impervious to all influence. To be sure, fashion restores a form of external determination in the intellectual realm; it signifies one particular version of the influence of the other. But the authority is nondirective; it is accompanied by a greater desire for argumentation and a greater capacity for individual questioning. Consummate fashion is not an obstacle to the autonomy of human consciousness; it is the condition for a mass movement toward enlightenment. The notion of thinking without the help of others, apart from a nourishing intellectual and ideological climate, is in any case meaningless."Somewhere and somehow authority is always bound to play a part in intellectual and moral life. The part may vary, but some part there must be. The independence of the individual may be greater or less but can never be limitless."º If, in a world of creative geniuses, the mimetic reign of fashion may damage personal autonomy, it nevertheless allows personal autonomy to come into play at the level of the majority of human beings. Something always leads us to resist the idea that fashion might be considered an instrument of freedom. Beyond the apparent unifornmity it achieves. does fashion not lead to discouraging thoughtful individual efforts in the search for truth and justice, operating as it does through seduction and relying on mimetic facility? Is not being master of one's own thoughts necessarily the result of individual effort. an act of courage and explicit construction? In one sense it is impossible to get around this point of view: however, it applies better to the work of intellectual discovery than to the constitution of people's more general thoughts. If we restrict ourselves to a voluntarist definition of intellectual autonomy. only a few professionals in the realm of concepts can claim to have access to freedom of mind; the masses are condemned, and properly so, to idolatry and spectacle, to the consumption of idea-images, on the assumption that thev are incapable of reaching maturity, or of using their minds freely and creatively. It seems to me that such an elitist dichotomy fails to take into account the much more complex process that is under wav in modern societies. The conquest of individual freedom may be carried out at a more empirical level, through the multiplicity of influences and their confrontations, through the play of diverse comparisons. The progress of self-determination in history is not accomplished via the roval road of individual speculative effort, but via a set of cultural and social phenomena that are in apparent contradiction with the Enlightenment. "Have the courage to use your own intelligence. That is the motto of the Enlightenment." The era of consummate fashion is one that allows very large numbers of people to think for themselves; this is because the timeless order of tradition has exploded and terrorist systems of meaning have lost their hold on human minds. People are subject to a great variety of influences, but no single one of them is strictly determining any longer: no single one does away with the capacity to reconsider. The critical spirit is expanding in and through the mimicry of fashion, in and through the fluctuations of "opinion": such is the greatest paradox of the dynamies of enlightenment. Autonomy is inseparable from the mechanisms of heteronomy. Still, we ought to be wary of self-satisfaction: the impulsive reactions of the public, the phenomenon of sects, the various esoteric and parapsychological beliefs that often monopolize the news are here to remind us that enlightenment does not go forward without its contrary. The individualization of consciousness also leads to apathy and an intellectual vacuum, to instant" thinking and mental hotchpotch, to the most irrational commitments and new forms of superstition, to “anything and everything." But no matter how real and spectacular they may be, these phenomena must not be allowed to obscure the underlying force that is modifying the relation of individuals to truth and meaning. People may devote little time to the work of thinking, but they speak more often in their own names. They may produce few deliberate meditations, but human beings have moved closer to adulthood and maturity. The irrationality of fashion contributes to the fashioning of individual reason; fashion has its reasons that reason does not know.

# 