N THE PAsT few years, several social thinkers in France and Italy have confronted the reign of mass culture as largely and searchingly as possible while we in the English-speaking world have tended to narrow this subject to violence on television, the sexual ethics of rock stars, or the vices and virtues of an urban landscape increasingly resembling Disneyland. Perhaps the most provocative of these new European writers on mass society is the French philosopher Gilles Lipovetsky; in several books he has sought to explore the effect of mass culture on the practice of democracy. Does mass culture in fact create passive citizens incapable of political reasoning. as Tocqueville believed, today voting only for the candidate who simulates a movie star's version of The Statesman? Are the weak and unstable social bonds of people in a mass society necessarily a bad thing? Lipovetsky. a young writer who follows in the footsteps of the critic Roland Barthes and the sociologist Edgar Morin, has yet to crystallize a firm and fixed answer to these questions, but on the one hand, he has moved far beyond the celebration of mass culture as popular expression that rules much of the contemporary discourse of “cultural studies" in the English-speaking world, and on the other hand, he is anything but a conservative holding his nose at how the present smells, hoping to inhale again the perfumes of the past. His books see-saw between a pessimistic reading of the democratic possibilities of mass culture, as in The Empty Era. and the peculiar hopes for the future rendered in this book, The Empire of Fashion. Many English-speaking readers, I think, will find The Empire of Fashion as maddening as it is stimulating. This sociological tract celebrating the ephemeral and the playful aspects of modern society is written in a language of high seriousness, Immanuel Kant and St. Augustine rubbing shoulders with Pierre Cardin and the Red Hot Chili Peppers. Lipovetsky has based his arguments on the history of fashion, which the author believes is the leading edge of superficial experience, yet this is history such as few Anglo-Saxon historians would write it: the author often zig-zags over two thousand years in a single bound; his facts frequently cascade over each other; and he talks variously about clothing, bodily deportment, sex roles, sexual practices, political rhetoric, stage costume and set design, or acting techniques all as “fashion." The author calls upon his readers to put away outmoded tools of thinking like class analysis in favor of more modern toys of social understanding like advertising, yet the author has evidently never written an ad, sewn a hemline, or sold a shoe. The divide between Anglo-Saxon empirical habits and a perhaps more French manner of seizing hold of social life ought not, however, blind us to the general import and real importance of The Empire of Fashion. For in this book, Lipovetsky tries to see the worth in those aspects of mass society particularly scorned by traditional critics such as Tocqueville and Ortega y Gasset: he tries to understand our consumer-driven, chameleon desires as real desiring, and he seeks to affirm, through the history of fashion, that this modern stream of ephemeral sensations serves something like the common democratic good. "The more progress the ephemeral makes," he declares, "the more stable, profoundly unified and reconciled with their pluralist principles the democracies become. To be sure, this declaration is also an argument he makes to himself. In The Empty Era, Lipovetsky joins the company of writers like the philosopher Elaine Scarry, who believe this taste for ephemeral pleasure expresses in fact a fear of the pains entailed by deep engagement in the world and with oneself, the fear of experiencing disguised by a language of consumer pleasure. Particularly shocking to the traditional liberal reader (I count mvself as one) may be the assertion in The Empire of Fashion that democracy works better, the more superficial the social relations are between people in a democratic polity. Put another way, the author asks what will make it possible for people to live together in some harmony in a world no longer ruled by inherited caste or religious injunctions. Rather than concoct bureaucratic or procedural answers to this question, Lipovetsky deals directly with how people feel about one another: the less they feel, the better they will get along. To ask people to take a deep interest in each other's lives is to invite disaster—people are more likely to say. "I hate who you are" than to say, "let's work together." If this seems perverse. think only of what happens in erotic life, in its many lurches and disastrous turns, its frequent ruptures; a political regime simply cannot afford such jolts, and the only way to prevent them is to make people less mutually engaged, more tolerant because mutually indifferent. Whether he is wrong or right this is the tough-minded core of Lipovetsky's enterprise: his book could equally well have been called An Apology for Indifference. How are people to "achieve" such mutual indifference? This is fashion's role in Lipovetsky's scheme; in the course of Western civilization, fashion in the modern world has served the achievement of democracy by trivializing desire. People who see the world in terms of Gap ads feel very little about it, and about one another, but they see equally and easily; no barriers of caste, education, or indeed taste, stand in the way. Fashion is in this sense a uniform of desire. The author recognizes, of course, that much advertising deals in social distinctions of class and age; his argument, however, is that advertising and other mass-media mechanisms make everyone who looks at a Cartier ad feel, “I want that watch, and I could enjoy it as much as anyone else—if only I had the money." The author argues that this realm of consuming desires weakens anger against those who actually have the money rather than sharpening resentment; in perhaps the most interesting sections of the book, he explains how the phenomena of "difference" in modern society have shifted to the realm of fantasy rather than direct confrontation; in the erotic-tinged realm of consumer fantasy. all differences can be overcome—the man who dreams of the Cartier watch has already possessed it, in a sense, because he has dreamt it into his life. As this brief summary may make clear, Gilles Lipovetsky has radically challenged the assumptions we make in thinking about the social good. He violates. for instance. the classic sociological opposition made by Ferdinand Tonnies between Gesellschaft and Gemeinschaft—impersonal social structure versus intimate social relations. In Lipovetsky's view, the impersonal is the realm of fantasy and desire, structured in such a way that masses of people can get along with one another, whereas the personal is a realm of social rupture, a lack of connection. Lipovetsky challenges Tocqueville's assumptions about democracy: what Tocqueville called the vices of democratic individualism—its weakening of a person's desire to engage in the world—Lipovetsky sees as a genuine virtue; the only way to make diversity work in society is to make people less interested, and so less interfering, in the lives of people unlike themselves. Lipovetsky also challenges the assumptions made by the Frankfurt School about homogenized experience in a modern consumer society. Fashion, he says, may homogenize particular veins of taste; for instance, all jeans may look alike each year. But the economics of the fashion system produces ever more different kinds of goods; in place of the trousers worn by people in premodern societies, today there are jeans, corduroys, bellbottoms, slacks—every brand of each kind of men's pants much like other brands, but the kinds of pants ever more diverse. Similarly, consumer markets segment electronic machines and gadgets, foods, and home furnishings. Thus, the things of the world become at once more homogeneous of kind, and more various in kinds, and this leads—Lipovetsky claims—to greater individuality through consumption even though each object consumed is a cliché. Through the pursuit of fashion, people become complex selves, though this complexity differs radically from the interior, soulful selfhood of the past. Perhaps the most challenging part of Lipovetsky's argument lies here: is a new form of individuality coming into being, one created by surface complexity of desire rather than by deepening of the soul? His proposal can be understood as taking to one extreme the idea of a secular self, a self no longer obliged to search for the secrets of faith, and the relation of faith to worldly desire; Lipovetsky's individual is liberated from all truth bevond the stimulating flicks of the desire to taste, own, consume. To be sure, even in this book Lipovetsky pulls back from a pure celebration of this state of affairs. “The consummate reign of fashion smooths over social conflict, but it deepens subjective and intersubjective conflict; it allows more individual freedom, but it generates greater malaise in living." The reason for this is that the human capacity to desire far outstrips those icons of desire which can be so smoothed and shaped that they can be easily desired by all. "The euphoria of fashion has its counterparts."the author declares, “in dereliction, depression, and existential anguish." The author leaves us there. What does this "existential anguish" mean about democracy? Does a politics of mutual toleration require privatized suffering? Could the political sphere possibly do something about that anguish? Lipovetskv's book unfolds like a fashion show, with Democracy. Subjectivity, Media, and Desire appearing down the runway as so many supermodels, each possessing the supermodel's gift of "the walk." that ability to show off to all sides of a crowded room. And vet when these high-priced bodies reach the end of the runwav. they do something surprising, perhaps surprising most of all their designer: thev break into speech. They are unhappy, they are human beings: more than to be desired, they want to be respected. If, when they burst into speech. we have to attend to them in another way, it is Gilles Lipovetsky's gift nonetheless to have dressed them so dramatically. Richard Sennett IHE QUEsTIoN of fashion is not a fashionable one among intellectuals. This observation needs to be emphasized: even as fashion goes on accelerating its ephemeral legislation, invading new realms and drawing all social spheres and age groups into its orbit, it is failing to reach the very people whose vocation is to shed light on the mainsprings and mechanisms of modern societies. Fashion is celebrated in museums, but among serious intellectual preoccupations it has marginal status. It turns up everywhere on the street, in industry, and in the media, but it has virtually no place in the theoretical inquiries of our thinkers. Seen as an ontologically and socially inferior domain, it is unproblematic and undeserving of investigation: seen as a superficial issue, it discourages conceptual approaches. The topic of fashion arouses critical reflexes even before it is examined objectively: critics invoke it chiefly in order to castigate it, to set it apart, to deplore human stupidity and the corrupt nature of business. Fashion is always other people. We are overinformed about fashion in terms of journalistic accounts. but our historical and social understanding of the phenomenon leaves much to be desired. The plethora of fashion magazines is matched by the silence of the intelligentsia, by its forgetfulness of fashion as both infatuation with artifice and the new architecture of democracy. Many studies have been devoted to the subject, of course. We have masterful histories of costume, and an abundance of detailed monographs on the trades associated with fashion and its creators; we do not lack statistical information about its production and consumption, or historical and sociological studies of shifting tastes and styles. However, we must not allow these bibliographical and iconographical riches to obscure the most important thing about fashion: the profound, general, largely unconscious crisis that actually holds the key to an overall understanding of the phenomenon. The case of fashion may be unique in the universe of speculative thought. Here is an issue that has stirred up no real battles over its problematics; it has provoked no significant theoretical dissension. As a matter of fact, the question accomplishes the feat of bringing about a meeting of virtually all minds. For the last hundred years or so, the enigma of fashion has seemed by and large resolved. There has been no major dispute over its interpretation; the corporation of thinkers, with admirable collective momentum, has adopted a common credo on the subject. In this view, fashion's fickleness has its place and its ultimate truth in the existence of class rivalries, in the competitive struggles for prestige that occur among the various layers and factions of the social body. This underlying consensus leaves room—according to the theoreticians, of course—for interpretive nuances, for slight inflections, but with only a few exceptions the inconsistent logic of fashion and its assorted manifestations is invariably explained in terms of social stratification and social strategies for achieving honorific distinction. In no other realm is scholarly knowledge so firmly ensconced in the untroubled repetition of a single all-purpose recipe available for exploitation by lazy minds. Fashion has become a problem devoid of passion, lacking in theoretical stakes, a pseudo-problem whose answers and explanations are known in advance. The capricious realm of fantasy has managed only to impoverish the concept and reduce it to monotony. The study of fashion needs new impetus, renewed questioning. Fashion is a trifling, fleeting, “contradictory" object par excellence: for that very reason it ought to provide a good stimnulus for theoretical argument. The opacity of the phenomenon, its strangeness, its historical originalitv. are indeed considerable. How has an institution structured by evanescence and aesthetic fantasy managed to take root in human historv? Why in the West and not elsewhere? How can an age doninated by technology. an age in which the world is subjugated by reason, also be the age of fashion in all its unreasonableness? How are we to conceptualize and account for the establishment of shallow instability as a permanent system? Once we resituate fashion within the vast life span of societies. we cannot see it as the simple manifestation of a passionate desire to be admired and to set oneself apart; it becomes an exceptional, highly problematic institution. a sociohistorical reality characteristic of the West and of modernity itself. From this standpoint, fashion is less a sign of class ambition than a way out of the world of tradition. It is one of the mirrors that allow us to see what constitutes our most remarkable historical destiny: the negation of the age-old power of the traditional past, the frenzied modern passion for novelty, the celebration of the social present. The schema of social distinction that has come to be viewed as the sovereign key for understanding fashion, in the realm of objeets and modern culture as well as dress, is fundamentally unable to account for fashion's most significant features: its logie of inconstaney, its great organizational and aesthetic mutations. 'This idea is the basis for the overall reinterpretation I propose here. By insisting on the idea of social distinction, theoretical reason has set up as the motive force of fashion what is actually its immediate, ordinary acceptation. 'Theoretical reason has remained in the thrall of the lived meaning of the actors on the social stage, positing as fashion's origin what is merely one of its social functions. This identification of origin with function lies behind the extraordinary simplification that characterizes genealogical explanations of the “invention" of fashion and its transformations in the West. A kind of epistemological unconscious underlying discourse on fashion, the problematics of social distinction has become an obstacle to a historical understanding of the phenomenon, an obstacle accompanied by an ostentatious play of conceptual whorls capable of concealing the deficiencies of scholarly discourse on the subject. A theoretical face-lift is in order. It is time to detach analyses of fashion from the heavy artillery of social class, from the dialectic of social distinction and class pretensions. Countering the imperialism of schemas of symbolic class struggle. I seek to show that, in the history of fashion modern cultural meanings and values, in particular those that elevate newness and the expression of human individuality to positions of dignity, have played a preponderant role. These are the factors that allowed the fashion system to come into being and establish itself in the late Middle Ages: in an unexpected way, these same factors allow us to trace the major stages in fashion's historical evolution. What I offer here. then, is an interpretive history of fashion: a conceptual and problematic history, governed not by a desire to set forth its inexhaustible contents but by a desire to present a general interpretation of the phenomenon and its metamorphoses over time. I shall not provide a chronological history of stvles and social elegance; instead, I shall focus on the defining moments. the major structures, the organizational, aesthetic, and sociological modulations that have determined the centuries-long course of fashion. I have deliberately opted here for a clear and comprehensive overview at the expense of detailed analyses: what we lack most is not specific knowledge. but the global meaning, the underlying economy, of the dynamics of fashion. This book, then, has two goals. On the one hand. I seek to understand the emergence of fashion in the late Middle Ages and its principal lines of evolution over the centuries. In order to avoid psychosociological generalizations about fashion that manifest little historical understanding, and in order to resist resorting to broad parallelisms of a kind that are all too often artificial, I have chosen to confine my attention here to a relatively homogeneous object that best exemplifies the phenomenon in question: clothing and its accessories, the archetypal domain of fashion. On the other hand, I attempt to comprehend the rising power of fashion in contemporary societies, the central, unprecedented place it occupies in democracies that have set out along the path of consumerism and mass communications. For the dominant feature of our societies, one that has played a major part in my decision to undertake this book, is precisely the extraordinary generalization of fashion: the extension of the “fashion form to spheres that once lay beyond its purview, the advent of a society restructured from top to bottom by the attractive and the ephemeral-by the very logic of fashion. Hence the unevenness in this book's organization, as measured by the yardstick of historical time. Part One, which deals with fashion in the narrow sense, covers more than six centuries of history. Part Two analyzes fashion in its multiple networks, from industrial objects to the culture of the mnass media, from advertising to ideology, from communication technologies to the social sphere; it focuses on a much briefer historical period, the era of democratic societies oriented toward mass production, consumption, and communication. This difference in the way historical time is treated and explored is justified bv the new, highly strategic place now occupied by the fashion process in the workings of free societies. Fashion is no longer an aesthetic embellishment, a decorative accessory to collective life; it is the key to the entire edifice. In structural terms, fashion has completed its historical trajectory; it has reached the peak of its power, for it has succeeded in reshaping society as a whole in its own image. Once a peripheral phenomenon, it is now hegemonic. In the pages that follow, I seek to shed some light on the historical rise of fashion, in an attempt to understand how its empire was established. how it evolved and reached its apogee. In our societies, fashion is in the driver's seat. In less than half a century, attractiveness and evanescence have become the organizing principles of modern collective life. We live in societies where the trivial predominates, societies that constitute the last link in the centuries-old capitalist-democratic-individualist chain. Should we be dismaved by this? Does it announce the slow but inexorable decline of the West? Must we take it as the sign of the decadence of the democratic ideal? Nothing is more commonplace or widespread than the tendency to stigmatize-not without cause, moreover-the consumerist bent of democracies: they are represented as devoid of any great mobilizing collective projects. lulled into a stupor by the private orgies of consumerism, infantilized by "instant" culture, by advertising, by politics-as-theater. The ultimate reign of seduction annihilates culture, it is said, and leads to a general brutalization, to the collapse of a free and responsible citizenry: no intellectual tendency is more widely shared than the tendency to condemn fashion. The contradictory and paradoxical interpretation of the modern world I propose here, however, points in quite a different direction. Looking bevond fashion's "perversions," I attempt to reveal its globally positive power with respect both to democratic institutions and to the autonomy of consciousness. Fashion holds more surprises in store: whatever deleterious influence it may have on the vitality of minds and democracies, it appears above all as the primary agent of the spiraling movement toward individualism and the consolidation of liberal societies. To be sure, the frivolous new deal is apt to provide fodder for a certain number of anxieties. The society it outlines does not look much like the democratic ideal, and it does not offer the best conditions for getting out of the economic slump into which we have slid. On the one hand, our citizens take little interest in public affairs. Lack of motivation and indifference to politics prevail more or less everywhere; the voter's behavior is beginning to resemble the consumer's. On the other hand, isolated, selfabsorbed individuals are not much inclined to consider the general good to give up acquired privileges: preparing for the future tends to be sacrificed by individuals and groups to immediate satisfactions. Citizens' behavior is just as problematic where the vitality of the democratic spirit is concerned—that is, the capacity of our societies to take themselves in hand, to make timely conversions, to win the new market war. All these weaknesses are well known, and they have been abundantly analyzed. The same cannot be said, however, for the future prospects of democracies. To put it succinctly, late-twentieth-century democracies, inconstant as thev seem, do not lack weapons with which they can confront the future. The resources they now have at their disposal are priceless, although they are not measurable and not very spectacular: they consist of a human "raw material" that is more flexible than we used to think. This raw material has come to terms with the legitimacy of peaceful change; it has given up revolutionary and Manichean worldviews. Under fashion's reign. democracies enjoy a universal consensus about their political institutions: ideological extremes are on the wane and pragmatism is on the rise; the spirit of enterprise and efficiency has been substituted for prophetic incantation. Should these factors of social cohesion, of institutional soliditv. of modernist “realism," be completely disregarded? Whatever social conflicts and corporatist reflexes may hinder modernization, the process is under wav, and it is gathering steam. Fashion does not do away with the demands and defensive tactics of special-interest groups, it makes them more negotiable. Conflicts of interest and selfishness remain, but they are not obstacles: they never reach the point of threatening the continuity or the order of the republic. I do not share the gloomy outlook of some observers about the future of the European nations. These pages have been written with the idea that our history has not played itself out, that in the long run the consummate fashion system represents an opportunity for democracies. Now that they are free from the fervor of extremists, the democracies have been by and large won over to change, to perpetual reconversion, to the need to reckon with national and international economic realities. Here are the first paradoxes of our societies: the more seduction is used as a tool, the more people face up to reality; the more triumphant the element of playfulness becomes, the better the economic ethos is rehabilitated; the more progress the ephemeral makes, the more stable, profoundly unified, and reconciled with their pluralist principles the democracies become. Although these factors cannot be quantified, they constitute immense assets for the construction of the future. To be sure, on the level of short-term history, the data are not always encouraging; to be sure, not everything will be accomplished all at once, without collective effort, without social tensions, and without a political will to change. Still, in an age recycled by the fashion form, history is more open than ever. Modernism has won such a measure of social legitimacy that the recovery of Western European nations is more probable than irreversible political decay. Let us avoid reading the future solely in the light of quantified schemas of the present. An age that functions in terms of information, the seductive power of novelty, tolerance, and mobility of opinions. is preparing us, if only we can take advantage of its strong points, for the challenges of the future. We are going through a difficult passage. but we are not at an impasse. The promises of fashion society will not yield their fruits right away; we need to let time do its work. In the short run, we may see little beyond rising unemployment, a precarious labor market, weak growth rates, a flabby economy. If we fix our gaze on the horizon, however. reasons for hope are not entirely lacking. The mature phase of fashion is not the road to oblivion. Considered with a certain detachment, it leads to a dual view of our destiny: pessimism about the present, optimism about the future. The denunciation of the consummate stage of fashion has taken on its most virulent tones in the domain of the life of the mind. In analyzing media culture as a reason-destroying machine, a totalitarian enterprise designed to do away with autonomous thought, the intelligentsia has made common cause, speaking with one voice to stigmatize the degrading dictatorship of the consumable, the infamv of the culture industries. As long ago as the 194os. Theodor Adorno and Max Horkheimer were inveighing against the "monstrous" fusion of culture, advertising, and industrialized entertainment that led to the manipulation and standardization of consciousness. Later, Jürgen Habernas analyzed media-oriented consumer products as instruments designed to reduce people's capacity for critical thinking, while Guy Debord denounced the "false consciousness," the generalized alienation induced by the pseudo-culture of the spectacular. And today, although Marxist and revolutionary thought are no longer in season, the offensive against fashion and media-induced brain rot is again in full swing: new times bring new ways of saying the same old thing. In place of Marx-as-joker, out comes the Heidegger card The dialectic panoply of merchandising. ideology. and alienation is no longer brandished; instead, we find musings on the dominion of technology, "the autonegation of life," or the dissolution of "life with the mind." We are invited to open our eyes, then, to the immense wretchedness of modernity. We are condemned to the degradation of a media-dominated existence. A soft totalitarianism, we are told, has infiltrated our democracies: it has successfully sown contempt for culture; it has generalized regression and mental confusion. We are fully ensconced in “barbarianism, according to the latest jingle of our antimodern philosophers. They fulminate against fashion, but they are quick to follow its lead, adopting similar hyperbolic techniques, the sine qua non of conceptual one-upmanship. There is no way around it: the hatchet of apocalyptic war has not been buried: fashion will always be fashion. Denunciation of fashion is no doubt consubstantial with its very being; such denunciation is part and parcel of the crusades of lofty intellectual souls. The critical unanimity provoked by the empire of fashion is anything but accidental. It is deeply rooted in the thought process that underlies philosophical reflection itself. Ever since Plato's day we have known that the play of light and darkness in the cavern of existence blocks progress toward truth. Seduction and evanescence enchain the human spirit, and they are the very signs of its captivity. According to Platonic philosophy, rational thinking and progress toward truth can only come about through a fierce effort to root out appearances, flux, the charm of images. No intellectual salvation is to be found in the protean universe of surfaces; this is the paradigm that presides even today over attacks on the rule of fashion. Ready access to leisure. the ephemeral nature of images, the distracting seductiveness of the mass media—these phenomena can only enslave reason. beguile and disorder the mind. Consumption is superficial, thus it makes the masses childlike; rock music is violent and nonverbal, thus it does away with reason; the culture industries deal in stereotypes, thus television abuses individuals and creates couch potatoes, while “feeling and "zapping" produce airheads. Superficiality is evil in any event. Whether they see themselves as followers of Marx or Heidegger, our intellectual clerks have remained moralists trapped in the froth on the surfaces of phenomena; they are completely unable to fathom the way fashion actually works-what we might call the ruse of fashion's irrationality. Here is fashion's greatest and most interesting historical lesson: at the other extreme from Platonism, we need to understand that seduction now serves to limit irrationality; that the artificial facilitates access to the real: that superficiality permits increased use of reason; that playful displays are springboards to subjective judgment. Fashion does not bring about the definitive alienation of the masses; it is an ambiguous but effective vector of human autonomv, even though it functions via the heteronomy of mass culture. The paradoxes of what is sometimes called postmodernitv reach their apogee here: subjective independence grows apace with the empire of bureaucratic dispossession. The more ephemeral seduction there is, the more enlightenment advances, even if it does so in an ambivalent way. At any given moment, to be sure, the process is hard to detect, so compelling are the negative effects of fashion. The process comes into its own only by comparison over the long term with the evils of earlier eras: omnipotent tradition, triumphant racism, religious and ideological oppression. The frivolous era of consumption and communication has been caricatured to the point of delirium by those on the right and the left alike who hold it in contempt; it needs to be reinterpreted from start to finish. Fashion cannot be equated with some gentle new realism. Quite to the contrary. fashion has allowed public questioning to expand; it has allowed subjective thoughts and existences to take on greater autonomy. Fashion is the supreme agent of the individualist dynamic in its various manifestations. In an earlier work I sought to identify the contemporary transformations of individualism;¹ here I have tried to understand what paths the process of individualization has taken, what social mechanisms it has used in order to enter the second cycle of its historical trajectory. Let me attempt to set forth briefly the idea of history implied by an analysis that takes fashion as the ultimate phase of democracy. Clearly in one sense I have returned to the philosophical problematics of the ruse of reason: collective “reason" advances in fact through its contrary. distraction; individual autonomy develops through the heteronomy of seduction: the “wisdom" of modern nations is constructed through the folly of superficial tastes. What is at issue is not the classic Hegelian model, the disorderly game of selfish passions in the achievement of a rational city. but a formally equivalent model: the role of the frivolous in the development of critical, realistic, tolerant consciousness. The erratic progress of the exercise of reason is brought about, as in Hegel's and Marx's philosophies of history, by the action of its opposite. But my complicity with theories of the ruse of reason ends here. I shall limit my purview to the dynamics of contemporary democracies alone; I shall not proceed to develop a global conception of universal history, nor do I intend to imply any metaphysics of seduction. To avoid misunderstandings, I need to add two further remarks. First. the fashion form that I analyze is not antithetical to "rationality": seduction is already in itself, in part, a rational logic that integrates the calculations, technology, and information that characterize the modern world. Consummate fashion celebrates the marriage of seduction and productive, instrumental, operational reason. What is at stake is not at all a vision of modernity that would affirm the progress of rational universality through the dialectical play of individual tendencies, but the autonomy of a society structured by fashion, where rationality functions by way of evanescence and superficiality, where objectivity is instituted as a spectacle, where the dominion of technology is reconciled with play and the realm of politics is reconciled with seduction. Second, 1 do not subscribe unreservedly to the idea of the progress of consciousness. In reality, as enlightenment advances it is inextricably mingled with its opposite; the historical optimism implied by my analysis of fashion must be confined within narrow limits. Human minds taken collectively are in fact better informed but also more disorderly, more adult but also more unstable, less subject to ideologies but also more dependent on fashions, more open but also more easily influenced, less extremist but also more dispersed, more realistic but also more fuzzy, more critical but also more superficial, more skeptical but also less meditative. An increase in independent thinking goes hand in hand with increased frivolity; tolerance is accompanied by an increase in casualness and indifference among thinkers. Neither theories of alienation nor theories of some optimal “invisible hand" offer an adequate model for fashion, and fashion institutes neither the reign of ultimate subjective dispossession nor the reign of clear, solid reason. Even though it has links with theories of the ruse of reason, the model for the evolution of contemporary societies that I propose does not make the intentional initiative of human beings any less significant. Insofar as the ultimate order of fashion produces an essentially ambivalent historical moment of consciousness, the lucid, voluntary, responsible action of human beings is more possible than ever, and more necessary for progress toward a freer, better-informed world. Fashion produces the best and the worst. inseparably: news around the clock, and zero-degree thinking. It is up to us to stand our ground and challenge myths and presuppositions; it is up to us to limit the harmful effects of disinformation, to bring about the conditions for a more open, freer, more objective public debate. To say that the universe of seduction contributes to the dynamics of reason does not condemn us to nostalgia for the past; it does not mean that “everything is the same in the end"; it does not amount to a smug apology for generalized show business. Fashion is accompanied by ambiguous effects. Our job is to reduce its “obscurantist” dimension and enhance its “enlightened” dimension—not by seeking simply to eradicate the glitter of seduction, but by putting its liberating potential at the service of the greatest number. Consummate fashion calls neither for unconditional defense nor for unqualified rejection. If the terrain of fashion is propitious for the critical use of reason, it also makes manifest the exile and confusion of thought: there is much to correct, to regulate, to criticize, to explain ad infinitum. The ruse of fashion's irrationality does not rule out human intelligence and free initiative, or society's responsibility for its own future In the new democratic era, collective progress toward freedom of thought will not occur apart from seduction; it will be undergirded by the fashion form, but it will be seconded by other agencies, reinforced by other criteria: by the educational establishment, by the openness to scrutiny and the ethical standards proper to the media, by theoretical and scientific works, and by the corrective system of laws and regulations. In the slow, contradictory, uneven forward movement of free subjectivities, fashion is clearly not alone on the slopes, and the future remains largely undetermined insofar as the specific features of individual autonomy are concerned. Lucidity is always hard-won; illusion and blindness. like the phoenix, are always reborn from their own ashes. Seduction will fully accomplish its democratic work only if it succeeds in allying itself with other parameters, if it avoids stifling the sovereign rules of truth, facts, and rational argument. Nevertheless, contrary to the stereotypes in which it is clothed. the age of fashion remains the major factor in the process that has drawn men and women collectively away from obscurantism and fanaticism, has instituted an open public space and shaped a more lawful, more mature, more skeptical humanity. Consummate fashion lives on paradox. Its unconscious is conducive to consciousness; its madness is conducive to the spirit of tolerance; its frivolity is conducive to respect for the rights of man. In the speeded-up film of modern history, we are beginning to realize that fashion is the worst scenario, with the exception of all the others. PARTONE 