Part 1 Social Innovation and Design When confronted with new problems, human beings tend to use their innate creativity and design capacity to invent and realize something new: they innovate. It has always been like that, but today these everyday innovations are spreading, appearing in unprecedented forms and making themselves felt with greater force. Their diffusion and character result from the combination of two main factors. The first is, of course, the nature of the problems to be dealt with on different scales, including everyday experience. The second is the pervasive diffusion of information and communication technologies and their potential in terms of organizational change. In such a situation, it is likely that a growing number of people facing a problem also see an opportunity and find a new way to solve it. However, maybe what is happening goes beyond that. These people may not only be solving their own problems. In doing what they do, they may also be setting the basis of a new civilization. ## Social innovation "In 2005 in Liuzhou, Guangxi province (China), a group of citizens found that they could not access good, safe food in ordinary markets. They went to villages, about a two-hour drive from the city, and found that traditional agriculture models, though struggling, still survived in the remote countryside. With the intention of helping these farmers and developing a stable channel of organic food, they founded a social enterprise: a farmers' association called Ainonghui."¹ This story is one of the many collected by Fang Zhong for her PhD thesis on collaborative services in China. For several reasons I find it particularly telling: it is a wonderful case of social innovation, in which a group of citizens and farmers imagined and put into practice an original way to solve their problems and open new opportunities (example 1.1). ## Example 1.1 ## AINONGHUI, A CASE OF COMMUNITY-SUPPORTED AGRICULTURE, LIUZHOU (CHINA) Ainonghui is a farmers' association in Liuzhou, Guangxi province (China). It has been set up by a group of farmers and citizens to produce and deliver organic food. In practice it is an application of the community-supported agriculture idea in China. "Today, beyond producing and delivering food, Ainonghui farmers' association manages four organic restaurants and a community organic food store. By selling traditionally sourced food to citizens, they also educate them on what traditional/organic agriculture is and introduce a sustainable lifestyle into the city. Thanks to Ainonghui and the direct links it has created between citizens and farmers, the incomes of farmers are now better able to sustain traditional farming while allowing them to lead a better and respected life. What's more, several farmers have returned to the countryside to join the organic food network."² The core of this example is the unprecedented relationship between farmers rooted in their village, cultivating their traditional knowledge and expertise, and citizens who have been exposed to ideas circulating in worldwide networks and who are endowed with a particular design and entrepreneurial capacity. Recognizing the complementary nature of their motivations and capabilities, they have been able to bridge the culture gap and overcome mutual prejudices to generate a solution that, otherwise, would have been impossible. But, in my view, this case is also much more than that: it is a working example of a brand-new production and economic model. The production model is based on the idea of creating direct links between production (in this case, farming) and consumption; one that is connected on a local scale but also open to the global flow of people and ideas (which makes it a distributed production system).3 The economic model operates in the framework of a new social economy in which different economies coexist and in which "everybody wins":4 the group of citizens who started it (and who now have the good, safe food they wanted) and the farmers involved. Ainonghui is a wonderful example of the growing number of initiatives worldwide that are dealing with fresh, organic, healthy food and its links with farming: from farmers'markets to food coops, zero-mile food, and community-supported agriculture. As we have already observed for Ainonghui, what all these initiatives propose is not only a new way of eating but a new way of producing, a new kind of relationship between production and consumption and between cities and their surrounding countryside. Once we start to observe society, looking for initiatives like these, a variety of other interesting cases appears: groups of families who decide to share some services to reduce the economic and environmental costs, but also to create new forms of neighborhoods (cohousing and a variety of forms of sharing and mutual help within a residential building or neighborhood); new forms of exchange and barter (from simple barter initiatives to time banks and local money); services where the young and the elderly help each other, promoting a new idea of welfare (collaborative social services) neighborhood gardens set up and managed by citizens who, by doing so, improve the quality of the city and of the social fabric (guerrilla gardens, community gardens, green roofs); systems of mobility in alternative to individual cars (car sharing, carpooling, the rediscovery of the possibilities offered by bicycles); new models of production based on local resources and engaging local communities (social enterprises); fair and direct trade between producers and consumers (fair trade initiatives). The first and most evident common characteristic of these initiatives is that they emerge from the creative recombination of existing assets (from social capital to historical heritage, from traditional craftsmanship to accessible advanced technology), which aim to achieve socially recognized goals in a new way. This common trait also give us a first definition of what social innovation is and why it appears. ## Ideas that work in meeting social goals⁵ "We define social innovations as new ideas (products, services and models) that simultaneously meet social needs and create new social relationships or collaborations. In other words, they are innovations that are both good for society and enhance society's capacity to act."⁶On the basis of this formal definition, we understand that social innovation has always existed; but nowadays, for various reasons, it is becomíng widespread practice, assuming unprecedented characteristics: on one hand, information and communication technology is spreading, with the new social forms it makes possible: on the other, an increasing number of people in different contexts. for one reason or another, are finding they have to reinvent their lives. Evidently this is the crux of the problem: today, in many western (traditionally rich) countries, the present economic crisis has been compelling more and more people to learn how to live, and if possible to live wel, while reducing their consumption and redefining their ideas about wellbeing (and work). At the same time, the majority of people in fast-growing economies are driven to shift quickly from their traditional socioeconomic contexts to new ones, which we will refer to as "modern":' they have to radically redefine the way they live and their ideas of well-being. Against this background, millions of other people are forced by poverty, wars, and environmental disasters to move from villages to cities (but it would be better to say from villages to shantytowns, bidonvilles, or favelas, depending on the region) and from their original country to others (where they hope to find a better and safer life). Each of these problems is a challenge for society as a whole and for its political institutions and agencies, on every scale from local to global. Each of them is a vast, worldwide social problem the solution to which cannot be found in traditional economic models and in top-down initiatives (even though these initiatives are desperately needed too). NGOs and civil society associations must play a role, and, most importantly, individuals, families, and communities must actively and collaboratively participate. This is where social innovation can help. Of course, the way this will happen is totally open, but there is no doubt that, everywhere and every day, millions of people are driven to change something in their way of living (and, beyond that, in their way of thinking and their idea of well-being). In this state of things, social innovation steps in as a potentially powerful agent of change in the entire sociotechnical system. ## Solutions to intractable problems In the last few years, social innovation has moved from the fringe to the center of the political agenda of several governments and, more generally, of public discussions.8 So, we can ask ourselves, why has this happened? A first answer to this question is very simple: social innovation works in solving problems that had previously been seen as very difficult, if not intractable. "The main reason," write Murray, Caulier-Grice, and Mulgan, "is that existing structures and policies have found it impossible to crack some of the most pressing issues of our times."9 They are referring to issues such as worldwide epidemics of chronic disease, widening inequality, aging societies, or threats to social cohesion in multicultural societies. Mulgan and his colleagues refer to these as intractable social problems: problems to which "the classic tools of government policy on the one hand, and market solutions on the other, have proved grossly inadequate."1o When facing these intractable problems, social innovation appears important because, as anticipated, it indicates viable ways of dealing with them: solutions that break the traditional economic models and propose new ones, operating on the basis of a multiplicity of actors' motivations and expectations. These new, complex organizational models challenge traditional mainstream ones, going well beyond the conventional polarities of private versus public, local versus global, consumer versus producer, need versus wish. The solutions of social innovation propose models where these polarities blur. They are, at the same time, both local (i.e., rooted in a place) and global (i.e., internationally connected to similar models); producer and user roles tend to overlap (given that everybody tends to actively participate); the personal motivations of wish and need tend to coincide, since people participate because they like it, but at the same time, because they need to. In particular, as far as this last polarity is concerned, the relative weight of these wishes and needs may change from region to region and from one time to another." However, in all the observed cases, social innovations seem to happen only if there is both need and the will to do something about it (that is, an appropriate combination of wishes and needs). ## Doing things in a (radically) different way We have already seen that, in practical terms, what these innovations do is to recombine existing resources and capabilities to create new functions and new meanings. In doing so, they introduce ways of thinking and problem-solving strategies that represent discontinuities with what is locally mainstream, i.e., with the ways of thinking and doing that are considered "normal" and are most widely applied in the sociotechnical context in which they operate (see box 1.1). For instance, in view of the widespread problem of a growing elderly population, the question could be: "How can we take care of all these elderly people?" In mature industrial societies and in the more globalized parts of emerging ones, i.e., in modernized societies, the mainstream answer is: "Create more dedicated professional social services." However, the radically innovative one is: "Consider the elderly not only as a problem but also as possible agents for its solution; support their capabilities and their will to be actively involved, and optimize use of their social networks." This initial revolutionary move of considering the elderly not only for what they need but also for what they are able and willing to do has led to a number of social inventions and enhancements. These range from circles of care and cohousing for the elderly (where elderly people are supported in different forms of mutual help), to effective symbiosis between the elderly and young people (as in the “Hosting a Student" example, where elderly people living in large houses offer a room to students who are willing to help), 1² to several other models of intergenerational residences in which residents of different ages agree to help each other. We can consider these examples as cases of radical innovation because, given a problem that looks very difficult (if not totally unsolvable) from a mainstream point of view, they propose a different way of looking at it (in this case, recognizing that elderly people are not only people with problems ## Box 1.1 ## Local discontinuities What does it mean to create a discontinuity with the current way of being and doing? In general terms, it means to create something that breaks the routine by proposing ways of behaving that are radically new. However, when dealing with social innovation, what does "radically new" mean? The first and obvious answer is that it cannot be defined in general terms, because the same idea and the same organization are not new to the same degree in different contexts. For instance, mutual help between neighbors is mainstream in a Rajasthan village in India, where it is part of a living tradition, but it mav be radically new in a middle-class neighborhood in London or Milan. A farmer selling his or her products in an African market is a “normal" expression of the local food and agriculture system, whereas farmers selling their vegetables and fruit at Union Square Farmers' Market in New York are a radical innovation compared to the conventional food and agriculture systems in the United States. As these examples clearly indicate, what is "radically new" in these organizations is context-dependent. In other words: setting up a collaborative organization based on mutual help in London and Milan is highly innovative, even though it may be similar in many ways to what normally happens in a Rajasthan village. Obviously, the same can be said for the Farmers' Market in Union Square in New York, compared to one in an African village. and needs and that, given the right conditions, many of them can change their role and actively participate in solving their own problems together with those of their peers). Once this change in outlook has been achieved, new viable solutions appear and with them a range of unforeseen positive outcomes. In fact, just like all radical innovations, these examples not only indicate a new strategy to solve a given problem, they reformulate the same problem, leading to very different results. In other words, responding to some urgent questions, radical innovations generate answers that change the questions themselves. ## Social economy in practice We can observe that, in the economic model on which these innovations are built, societal and environmental interests converge. Careful study of these models has led them to be seen as an expression of an emerging economy: a social economy where, as Robin Murray states, the market, the state, and the grant economy coexist with self- and mutual help, barter, charity, and other pro bono activities (which Murray includes as part of the household economy).¹³ Murray writes: "I describe it as a 'social economy' because it melds features which are very different from economies based on the production and consumption of commodities. Its key features include: The intensive use of distributed networks to sustain and manage relationships, helped by broadband, mobile and other means of communication. Blurred boundaries between production and consumption. An emphasis on collaboration and on repeated interactions, care and maintenance rather than one-off consumption. A strong role for values and missions."14 The result is that, even though it is still far from mainstream thinking, in several countries, especially those the present crisis is hitting the most, social innovation is attracting growing interest precisely because of the new social and economic models on which its results are based. In other words, there is “a growing recognition that societies need to speed up testing and diffusion of programs that can really deliver results for less money and alleviate the worst harm of the recession."15 As a matter of fact, I think that the hope of “deliver[ing] results for less money" has undoubtedly been the main driver in bringing social innovation to the political agenda of several governments, both for better and for worse. The positive side is that politically and socially this motivation touches very sensitive issues, and therefore it can really boost public interest in what social innovation can do. On the other hand, the risk is that social innovation could become the acceptable face of a program of cuts in public social budgets (supporting this program with the assumption that civil society should step in and deliver services previously delivered by the welfare state).1⁶ For me this is a very negative perspective, based on a mistaken interpretation of what social innovation can bring and of how collaborative organizations can work. In my view, in attempting to deal with the apparently intractable problems we are now considering, innovation of this kind could lead to a new generation of social services based on a renewed pact between citizens and the state. In this perspective, the state, far from being minimized, becomes an active and influential partner along with citizens and social enterprises. This last sentence leads us to widen our discussion from the intractable but relatively focused problems we have been considering to a much broader view. In fact, the problems that are triggering social innovation and which social innovation contributes to solve are, in my view, even greater than the ones we have been discussing. They include the crisis in the mainstream ideas of wellbeing, of work, and of the current production model: a crisis that not only demands specific solutions but calls for a new, hopefully wiser, civilization. ## Sociotechnical systems and innovation Before going on, we must draw attention to a theoretical point. Given that there are no human societies without technology, every change that concerns them is, at the same time, social and technical. Therefore, referring to social innovation is a simplification in terms. To be more precise, in these cases we should talk about innovation in the sociotechnical system triggered by a social change. By this I mean that by introducing a new social form that uses existing technologies but uses and combines them in new ways, it effectively changes the technical system Up to now, talking about social innovation in this simplified way has made sense because it enabled us to highlight the existence of change driven by social innovation, whereas the only driver of change considered for a century had been technical (or better still, technoscientific). Today this unilateral vision is no longer possible: the evidence before us shows that innovation in the sociotechnical system does not come only from the technical side; it is also socially and culturally driven. However, having made this general point (and justified the simplification that leads us to separate technology and social innovation), we must immediately complicate the picture: there is now, for reasons we shall see, a growing area of innovation in which it is very difficult, if not impossible, to make such a separation. The point is this: the more technical systems penetrate society (meaning the more far-reaching and more diffuse the interface between technology and society), the faster and more far-reaching will be their impact on the social systems in which they operate. In addition (and this is what most interests us here), the more people are exposed to these technologies, the greater their opportunity and ability to absorb them and understand how they can be used or adapted for purposes that the technical inventors and developers of the systems never dreamed of. This is clearly what has happened with information and communication technologies: rapidly penetrating into society, they have been quickly "normalized." This means that in just a few years they have become, for many people, the organizational platform for much of their day and indeed their life. In addition, many of these people have adapted them to their needs or invented totally new and unexpected ways of using them. All this has become so evident that many products are now offered to the general public in an openly incomplete version (the "beta version"), in order to be able to harvest the improvements or extensions that are suggested by users (who will therefore effectively become co-designers). It follows that, in more and more cases, it is becoming increasingly difficult to make the simplification that led us to distinguish between technical and social innovation. For a growing area of sociotechnical innovations, the discussion about which of the two sides (technical or social) made the first move tends to resemble the chicken-or-egg debate. ## Distributed and resilient systems While social innovation merging with technological innovation may find new ways to solve specific problems, this meeting itself is transforming infrastructure and production/consumption systems. Over recent decades, a new generation of sociotechnical systems has emerged and in some cases become widespread. As a whole, we can refer to them as distributed systems: sociotechnical systems that are scattered in many different but connected, relatively autonomous parts, which are mutually linked within wider networks. Chris Ryan, one of the main experts on this topic, defines them in this way: "The distributed model sees infrastructure and critical service systems (for water, food and energy etc.) positioned close to resources and points of demand. Individual systems may operate as separate, adaptive units but are also linked within ever-wider networks of exchange—at the local, regional or global level. Services traditionally provided by large centralized systems are instead delivered via the collective capacity of many smaller diverse systems. Each is tailored to the needs and opportunities of unique locations but has the capacity to transfer resources across a wider area."18 By enabling a new kind of relationship between small and large scale, and between the local and the global, distributed systems challenge mainstream production models and their technological infrastructure. The potential of these systems has been increasingly recognized thanks to their technological effectiveness and the enthusiasm of a growing number of people, making them entirely coherent with the ongoing social innovation we are dealing with here. Distributed systems are of course firmly based on technological innovation. However, their essentially distributed nature emerges out of more complex, innovative processes in which the technological side cannot be separated from the social one. While centralized systems can, in principle at least, be developed without considering the social fabric in which they will be implemented, this is impossible when the technological solution in question is a distributed one. In fact, the more a system is scattered and networked, the larger and more connected is its interface with society and the more the social side of innovation has to be considered. In other words, with regard to our discussion here, we can say that no distributed system can be implemented without social innovation: distributed solutions (such as small-scale production and use of renewable resources, localized food networks, microfactories) can only work if groups of dedicated people decide to adopt them and commit themselves to their implementation. Looking more attentively at how these distributed systems have appeared and spread, we can observe that it has happened at different moments and for different reasons: different waves of innovation that are gradually converging. The first of these, which has become the technical support for all the others, occurred when information systems shifted from their old hierarchical architecture to a new. networked one (distributed intelligence), with the radical changes in sociotechnical organizations that this made viable. The result has been that, as new distributed forms of knowledge and decision making have become more common, the rigid, vertical models that were dominant in industrialized society have started to melt into fluid, horizontal ones.2º The success of this innovation has been such that today networked architecture is considered an obvious “quasi-natural" state (but of course, as we have seen, this is not the case: before laptops and the Internet, information systems were based on large mainframe computers and their consequently hierarchical architecture). ## Distributed infrastructure The second wave of innovation has been affecting energy systems, and will affect water supply. As far as energy is concerned, a cluster of converging innovations has appeared that has put the energy sector into a new perspective: small, highly efficient power plants, renewable energy systems, and the “smart" grids that connect them have made it possible to move toward distributed solutions (distributed power generation). These solutions are challenging the as yet mainstream systems with their large power plants and hierarchical ("stupid," fragile) grids. They are now a major field of investment and competition within the strong, ongoing "green technology" trend. It is reasonable to think that these technologies will strongly impact the whole system and that, at the end of the day, the whole energy system will evolve in a trajectory similar to that of information systems, moving from a hierarchical architecture toward a distributed one.21 It is more than probable that a similar trajectory will be followed by water provision systems. In fact, climate change and the increase in water demand call for a new approach in water engineering and management. Also in this case, what is happening is a shift from centralized systems (with fresh water collected and stored from rivers and streams and distributed to final users for all uses) to distributed ones. In the latter, freshwater is restricted to high-quality uses (such as drinking water and a few others); all other water requirements are satisfied with local water: storm water and gray waste water locally retained and appropriately treated. This new distributed water system calls for specific planning (called water-sensitive urban design),22 and for new attitudes and behavior on the part of citizens. ## Distributed food networks The third wave of innovation toward distributed systems concerns food and agriculture. Two streams of sociotechnical innovation converge here. One is driven by concern about agriculture's dependence on chemicals and oil, and therefore about its fragility, and promotes local food in order to make the system more resilient. This stream of innovation is exemplified by movements such as "transition towns,"23 which propose to increase the self-sufficiency of local communities. The second stream of innovation is based on considerations about the quality of food and farming and is represented by movements like slow food.2⁴ In this case, the main motivation is a desire to improve the entire “food experience," linked to the “quality of proximity": a perceived quality deriving from a direct experience of the place where a product comes from and the people who produce it. Beyond the difference in initial motivation, the two streams converge in their practical proposals. Both indicate solutions that aim to connect farming and food consumption (and often proximity tourism), as in zero-mile food and community-supported agriculture. It must be added that interest in distributed food production systems is growing rapidly, influencing not only sizeable minorities but also a growing number of city councils who are starting dedicated programs and urban renewal schemes. ## Distributed fabrication A fourth wave of innovation challenges mainstream globalized production and consumption. It comes from the convergence of innovation in the field of production (with new, small, and effective machinery) and social networks (with unprecedented possibilities to integrate designers, manufacturers. and users). The result is worldwide experimentation in small-scale, high-tech design and fabrication systems capable of supporting new forms of open design and networked microfactories (such as the ones proposed by FabLabs and by the makers movement).26 We can add that the distributed production idea is migrating from this area of high-tech fabrication to traditional craftsmanship and small and medium-scale enterprises, revitalizing them and giving them a new perspective. Although these trends are still in their initial phase, we can foresee that they will grow stronger; that the whole production system will move toward design and production processes shaped by the principle of "making things as near as possible to where they will be used." There is little need to add that they have potential in terms of job creation and, most importantly, that their distributed nature enables them to bring these activities and related jobs to places where they have never been before, or where the processes of deindustrialization have led to their disappearance. The motivations behind these trends may differ widely. One of these could be seen as an almost linear evolution of the lean production approach (a manufacturing model that has dominated industrial-sector innovation for the last thirty years). In fact, distributed systems can be seen as the lightest and most flexible of production systems, able to create products for specific clients not only when they need them (customized and just-in-time production) but also where they need them (or, at least, as near as possible to the place where they need them): point-of-use production. A further set of motivations comes from various radical groups, against a background of worries similar to those behind the emergence of distributed food networks: the quest for autonomy from the great centers of finance and decision making, but also for self-sufficiency and ultimately for resilience in the sociotechnical systems in which we live, produce, and consume. ## Distributed economy Finally, we can observe that, today, the interest in distributed systems is going beyond the discussion on infrastructure and production models and is starting to affect economic models. As Chris Ryan writes, "there is growing interest in the model of distributed systems as a way of reconceptualizing the organization of a sustainable economy."27 In other words, it appears that a sustainable, resilient economy must also be a distributed economy: a local-global economy in which local economies operate as separate, adaptive units linked within ever-wider networks of exchange—at the local, regional, or global level. It follows that distributed systems are emerging as an expression of the new, wider economic paradigm of a social economy. As Robin Murray writes, "The shift to a networked paradigm has the potential to transform the relationship between organisational centres and peripheries. Its distributed systems handle complexity not by standardisation and simplification imposed from the centre, but by distributing complexity to the margins to households and service users, and in the workplace to local managers and workers. Those at the margins have what those at the centre can never have—a knowledge of detail—the specificity of time, of place, of particular events, and in the consumer's and citizen's case, of need and desire. This is the potential. But to realise it requires new terms of engagement with users, new relations at work, new terms of employment and compensation."28 ## Resilient systems As we have seen, interest in distributed systems is growing, along with interest in the value of proximity and self-sufficiency and in local economies and self-sufficiency (in food, energy, water, and fabricated products), in order to promote community resilience to external threats and problems.29 In fact, by their very nature, distributed systems are more resilient than mainstream vertical ones, because they are able to create sociotechnical systems capable of recovering from the various unforeseeable problems that may occur, and to learn from them.3º In my view, this issue of the resilience of sociotechnical systems is likely to become the most powerful driver toward distributed systems. Therefore, it is worth reflecting briefly on it. For a long time, we have known that whatever our future society will be, it will be a “risk society"³1a society likely to be affected by different kinds of traumatic events (from natural catastrophes, to war and terrorism, to financial and economic crisis). We have therefore long known that the necessary condition for every possible sustainable society is resilience—its capability of overcoming the risks it will be exposed to and the stresses and breakdowns that will inevitably occur.3² Today, the implications of this risk society are no longer only projected for the future. They are becoming evident worldwide in our daily life experiences. Therefore, the notion of resilience is moving into the vocabulary of more and more people, and it would be wise to accelerate its entrance into policymakers' agendas and into the design community's aims and practical actions. At the same time, we must keep to its original meaning, avoiding the tendency to normalize it and thus diminish its force, underestimating the risk to be withstood. In fact, when talking about enhancing resilience we are not referring to a modest, incremental change in existing (fragile and unsustainable) organizations. It is a systemic change that is required: a shift from vertical hierarchical systems to the distributed ones we have been discussing in this chapter. A shift that, to take place, asks not only for a sociotechnical change but for an equally important cultural one. ## Cultures of resilience In all its interpretations, the notion of resilience has been used heretofore in the framework of a defensive discourse: confronted by crises, we have to reorganize our society and make it more resilient in its current terms. But we can look at it also in a different, more positive and interesting way. If, technically, resilience means diversity, redundancy, and continuous experimentation, it also means that the corresponding society must be a diversified, creative one. Taking seriously the meaning of resilience, this compelling and deeply human image of society becomes much more than just a wish. It indicates the direction in which, very practically, we need to go if our society is to have any hope of lasting. In short: in a resilient society, cultural diversity and creativity must flourish. Indeed, cultural diversity and creativity must be an integral part of any scenarios of resilient societies. In sum, to move away from the mainstream ideas of the past century, one of the first steps must be to reposition the notion of resilience: to move it from a mainly defensive meaning (resilience as a necessity imposed by the risky times in which we live) to a more positive one: resilience as a deeper expression of the human character and, at the same time, as ground for a possible reconciliation between human beings and nature, between human beings and the irreducible complexity of our world. ## Multiple sustainable qualities We have seen that the search for more resilient systems calls for a new culture; or better, for a metaculture capable of forming the ground on which a multiplicity of cultures (the cultures of resilience) would be able to flourish.³3 Here I will draw a picture of how, in my view, these new cultures are starting to emerge. The convergence of social and technical innovation interacts with the way people are and think. The result is a cultural innovation that coevolves along with the social and technical ones. In this way, new behavior and values emerge, breaking with those that have been dominant and proffering new ideas on the quality of life, impacting what we count as well-being and the values on which we base our choices. Looked at from this point of view, the people who set up the new collaborative organizations can be seen to be exploring some of these same ideas. We can call this exploration a search for quality. In turn, when putting their solutions into practice, they give these ideas or qualities visibility, making them recognizable to others and potentially attractive to a wider range of people. Let me explain myself better.34 People who conceive and set up new solutions and those who participate in them do so by choice. Largely because of this, in the solutions they produce there are certain features that they see as better than those proposed by the mainstream, unsustainable system of production and consumption. They choose solutions that make possible what they perceive to be a higher quality of life, and one that involves less consumption (of products, energy, and space). In doing so, they compensate for reduced consumption with an increase in something else that they consider more valuable. This "something else" is generally represented by the qualities of their physical and social environments. We can refer to them as sustainable qualities: qualities that call for more sustainable behavior; qualities that, as social innovation empirically demonstrates, can substitute for the unsustainable ones that were predominant in the past century. These qualities are very diverse in nature, yet interdependent. They are like different views of a broader picture, the different facets of a complex pluriverse which could eventually be considered a pattern of signals indicating an emerging culture and, hopefully, an emerging civilization. ## Complexity and scale All the cases of social innovation and the solutions they generate are intrinsically complex. As such, they cannot be reduced to single motivations and single results: both motivations and results are multiple, and their quality depends on their variety and configuration. Promoters and participants recognize this kind of complexity as a core value in their existence, i.e., as richness in the experiences they offer. With this kind of complexity, the traditional boundaries between designer, provider, and user of a solution become increasingly blurred. There is no stereotypical profile of participants. The emergence of this "enriching complexity" can be considered a value that reflects the true nature of human beings (the complexity of which cannot be expressed in unidimensional terms). At the same time, this growing complexity is offset by a reduction in scale. Small-scale organizations are, generally speaking, more transparent and comprehensible and therefore closer to the local community. At the same time. many of these small-scale initiatives are connected to other similar or complementary ones. By jointly weaving a large distributed system. thev hint at a new concept of globalization—a distributed globalization where, for each process of production, distribution, and consumption, much of the decision making, know-how, and economic value remains in the hands, minds, and pockets of the local community. Collaborative organizations seem to orient themselves in this direction for two different sets of reasons. On the one hand, they enable members to understand and manage (in an open and democratic way) complex sociotechnical systems. On the other hand. the human scale of the communities gives individuals the opportunity to carry out their activities, fulfilling their needs and building their desired futures, from within the framework of organizations where human relationships continue to be lively and personal. ## Work and collaboration Enriched complexity and small scale form the backdrop against which human activities can be reshaped. At the center of this new scene stands the (re)evaluation of work as a primary means of human expression. Both promoters and participants seem to move in this direction. In fact, they reevaluate work, seeing human beings as individuals carrying out meaningful activities—people active in "making something happen," in trying to shape the context of their lives and create viable futures. As such, they are in radical opposition to the mainstream system that mostly considers human beings as mere consumers, as users and spectators of shows that somebody else has produced; but they are also challenging the traditional idea of work, because they attribute far greater value to manual work and because they extend the idea of work to a broader range of activities. These include tasks that are not normally considered work, such as care activities, neighborhood management, and community building: activities that ultimately enable people to face problems of everyday life and constitute the basic fabric of day-to-day quality of life. This framework leads to the notion of “meaningful work." In this process of reevaluation/redefinition of the notion of work, the value and the power of collaboration reappear. It is a necessary precondition for "making something happen" and for enabling people to play an active role in the construction of their chosen future. The majority of the solutions these innovative people generate are based on collaboration. They are groups of individuals who decide to connect in order to "make something happen."Participants freely decide to relinquish part of their individuality to create a system of links with other interested individuals. Ways of collaboration vary, as do the motivations for collaborating. In these initiatives there is a blend of discovery of the practical effectiveness of doing things together and the cultural value of sharing ideas and projects. In contrast to what used to happen in traditional communities, this form of collaboration is not mandatory: it is "collaboration by choice," where people can freely opt in or out. This intentional collaboration lies at the crossroads of two trajectories: one moving from the hyperindividualism of most industrialized societies toward a (re)discovery of the power of doing things together, and the other from traditional communities in less industrialized societies toward more flexible forms of intentional collaboration. ## Relationships and time The promising initiatives we are dealing with here are social organizations. Their structure is a system of interactions among people and between people, places, and products. These interactions are what ultimately characterize such organizations. Promoters and participants seem to be particularly sensitive to these interactions and to complex, deep human relationships. In fact, in several cases it is exactly this interest in the quality of relationships that tends to guide behavioral choices. This shift from products to interactions is not new. The current mainstream system of production and consumption has already made this shift, but often by reducing interactions to shallow experiences (e.g., proposing life as a kind of reality-TV show, or living environments as theme parks). Collaborative organizations, on the contrary, are generating solutions that, even though they are very diverse, are endowed with lively relationships: we could say relationships with a human touch. And it is exactly these lively relationships that the participants value. In turn, the search for lively relationships calls for new valuations, interpretations, and experiences of time: the time needed to build them. By this, we mean the time needed to link a multiplicity of actors, places, and products together and build several layers of meanings on them. Promoters and participants recognize this link and—unlike in contemporary accelerated time—they recognize slowness as a precondition for producing more profound qualities. The discovery of the "slow," of course, does not mean simply replacing the “fast time" dominant in the past century and up until now, with its opposite, "slow time." The time of complexity is an "ecology of times" where different types, with different characteristics and different paces, coexist. ## Locality and openness The small scale and interconnectedness of social organizations allow them to be deeply rooted in a place. Simultaneously, by being highly interconnected they can also be very open—to global flows of ideas, information, people, goods, and money. Promoters and participants tend to search for this balance between the local and the open: for a cosmopolitan localism capable of generating a new sense of place. As such, places are no longer isolated entities, but rather nodes in both short- and long-distance networks, where the short networks generate and regenerate the local socioeconomic fabric and the long ones connect a particular community to the rest of the world. Within this framework, a variety of new local, open, and highly contemporary activities are taking place, such as: the rediscovery of neighborhoods; the resurgence of local food and local crafts; the search for products developed close by, in order to have more direct experience of their origins; and the strategy of self-sufficiency to promote community resilience to external threats and problems. ## An emerging civilization? All these ideas, the activities they refer to, and the relationships they generate seem to me beautiful islands of applied cultural and socioeconomic wisdom. They are islands in the sea of unsustainable ways of being and doing that is, unfortunately, still the mainstream throughout the world. The good news is that the number of these islands is growing and generating a wide archipelago. An archipelago that could be seen as the emerging dry land of a rising continent: the already visible expression of a new civilization. Is this way of interpreting it a valid one? Of course this is an open question, but in my view the image of an emerging new continent is not only wishful thinking. On the contrary, it is a concrete possibility. $\operatorname { O r } ,$ to be more precise and pertinent to the spirit of this book, it is a design hypothesis: something that is not yet a reality, but that could become real if the necessary moves were made. Of course this metaphor, like all metaphors, has its limits: in the case of real islands the continent is already there, underwater, with all its characteristics, but this is not so for our metaphorical islands. What is emerging is a potentiality. The world that could arise out of it, for the most part, has still to take shape. What it will actually be like depends on us, on what we are able to do in the near future. "A new world is possible" was the claim of the Social Forum in Puerto Alegre. It was the year 2001. In that meeting the Indian writer Arundhati Roy made a statement destined to become very famous: "Another world is not only possible, she is on her way. On a quiet day, I can hear her breathing." Now, fourteen years later, not only can we confirm that it is on its way and that it is cleárly visible in the tangible results of social innovation that are multiplying worldwide, but we can also add that it is proposing both the vision of a future civilization and the direction in which to move in order to solve the great and growing problems we are facing today. Of course this new civilization is not, and will not be, built simply by adding together millions of individual social innovation initiatives. Other moves must be made and other changes must take place at every scale, mobilizing all existing resources. However, several signals tell us that, in this century, given the changes that have already occurred and given the challenges we still have to face, social innovation will be the main driver of change. It will play the role that, for good or bad, technological innovation (and industrial development) played one century ago. Final note: browsing through this chapter on social innovation as driver of change toward sustainability, some readers may observe that I have not discussed (unless very briefly) the powerful forces that are fighting against the emergence of a new, sustainable world: the forces of those who do not want to change (in order to protect their existing interests) and those who (aiming to create new profitable opportunities) do want to change and are actively trying to do so, but are leading us in the wrong, unsustainable direction. Of course these economic, political, and cultural forces are in the background of the whole picture I have tried to outline. However, while writing this chapter, I thought that my role, as a reflective designer, was not to add a new analysis of the nature and dimension of the problems and of the “enemy forces." Other writers have done and will do this much better than I could ever do. Instead, what I have tried to do here is to offer an oriented overview of the state of things, meaning a view that aims to trigger, support, and orient possible design actions. Moving from here, it will (hopefully) be possible to contribute in the following chapters to the building of new design knowledge: design knowledge that, in my view, is desperately needed if we are to join the battle for a sustainable world with a greater hope of victory. Or, to use again my favorite metaphor, to collaborate in helping the new continent emerge.