## 10 Making Things Local and Open People live at the same time in a social and a physical space; therefore their interactions also occur in both spaces. In the first they produce social forms, while in the second they produce places. All together they create society and the environment in which societies collocate and which, in turn, the societies themselves contribute to produce. The discussion on social innovation and the collaborative organizations it generates is therefore linked to that on the building of places and their new ecology. Thus design for social innovation has another dimension beyond those we have been talking about so far: that of place making. By this we mean its role as agent contributing in an original way to the social building of places. ## Place making A place is a space endowed with sense. In other words, it is a space that is meaningful for someone. In view of this, and given that meaning emerges from conversations, it would appear that for a place to exist there must be a group of people who talk about it and act in it. Traditionally, this group was the resident community: a stable group of people who lived near each other and shared the problems of everyday life. In this situation, sense making, and therefore also place making, happened slowly, over long periods in quasi-natural ways. In contemporary societies, since communication is no longer hindered by distance, people participate in a multiplicity of conversations with interlocutors who may be spread far and wide. In this new condition, it may happen that none of these conversations is between people leaving nearby, or is about subjects relating to the space where they live. If this is the case, then there is no place making. On the other hand, the physical space people occupy becomes a place when those sharing it decide to do something about it together. In our terms. this means that they decide to start and manage a place-related, collaborative organization; in so doing they become a special kind of intentional community: a place-related, and therefore a place-making, community. Since these are communities existing by choice, the resulting places exist by choice too. In short: they are intentional places co-designed by intentional communities. ## Places and communities Building, or rebuilding, places is important from various points of view. The first is that of the people who live there. For them, recognizing the value of places goes hand in hand with the emergence of a new idea of well-being: a sustainable well-being. In this development, a major role is played by the recognition of how far contexts (lively social fabrics, healthy environments, beautiful landscapes) contribute to quality of life: that is, how far places contribute to quality of life. The search for this kind of well-being is in my view, the major driver of the place-making dynamism we are observing today. To illustrate this statement, I shall start with a small initiative that tells us a lot about the role of collaborative organizations in place making, and therefore in enhancing a new idea of well-being. Coltivando is a community vegetable garden set up at the Politecnico di Milano Bovisa Campus. A new meaningful space has been created thanks to the proactive role of a design team (in this case composed of teachers and students) and the active, collaborative participation of local residents. The result has been to transform a space without any particular value for residents into something endowed with meaning, that is, into a place (example 10.1). What is special about Coltivando is the new relationship it created between the campus and the surrounding neighborhood. In fact, the initiative, started by students and teachers, succeeded in transforming a campus border area into a lively place, which in turn generated an equally lively community and brand-new interactions between students, teachers, and local residents. We can mention many other examples along the same lines, of local activities aimed at regenerating urban space and making it more dynamic: community gardens, neighborhood festivals, local enterprises and craft promotion, updated traditional neighborhood shops, and so on. But similar results can also be achieved as valuable by-products of activities having different main motivations. For instance: upgrading informal settlements thanks to appropriate services and infrastructure and collaborative organizations; or rural village improvements thanks to community-supported ## Example 10.1 COLTIVANDO, THE CONVIVIAL GARDEN AT THE POLITECNICO, MILAN Coltivando is a community vegetable garden set up at the Politecnico di Milano Bovisa Campus. It was proposed by a team of postgraduate students, supervised by researchers and teachers and co-designed with local neighborhood residents. The design team organized workshops with residents to co-design the community garden concept. At the end of the first two co-design sessions, more than 80 people from the neighborhood were involved. Then they started to create the garden itself and gradually a community started to come into being. Soon work was progressing in weekly building/gardening sessions, where people worked on setting up the garden and at the same time strengthening community ties. Work on both garden and community called for continuous co-designing. Davide Fassi, one of the promoters, says: "Coltivando is now a place where people are enjoying their free time, producing their own vegetables and fruits and enriching their social experiences through collateral activities e.g. seminars, schools visits and similar learning activities."1 agriculture and community-based tourism schemes. Such examples show that there is an interesting and positive connection between locally based collaborative organizations, new forms of resident communities, and new ideas of locality.² However, place building is not only important for the well-being of individuals and resident communities. The existence of a multiplicity and variety of places is a precondition of a more resilient natural, social, and production system: one that is capable of adapting to unexpected events and lasting over time. This is an issue of fundamental importance for the entire planet and will be even more so in the years to come, and the rebuilding of places is one of the main strategies for dealing with it. ## Places and resilience Since resilience is defined as the system's capacity to cope with stress and local failures without collapsing (and to learn from the experience), we can say that it is also a precondition for any conceivable sustainable society. To be sustainable, a society must be capable of overcoming the risks it will be exposed to and the stresses and breakdowns that will take place; and, most importantly, to learn from these events how to improve its performance. Today, the risks for our society are no longer only future projections. They are becoming evident all around the world: more and more frequently, our daily life experience involves coping with the fragility of our sociotechnical systems. As a consequence, resilience has become part of the vocabulary of an increasing number of people and organizations. Given this widespread use, two observations on usage are in order. First, the expression "resilient society" is not a synonym for sustainable society, if in the latter term we include—as in my opinion we should—its cultural dimension and the quality of life, in the profound fullness of its meaning. Resilience is rather a technical precondition, on the basis of which many different resilient societies may exist, endowed with different social and cultural characteristics. More importantly, since the current sociotechnical system is very fragile, transforming it into a resilient system would mean achieving a radical change of model (a prospect that is therefore the opposite of "resilience" in the sense of making the currently dominant model a little more adaptable). ## Design for resilience How can we design these resilient sociotechnical systems? Natural ecosystems,³ their tolerance of breakdown and their capacity to adapt, may point a way forward.⁴ In fact, as we anticipated in chapter 1, an ecosystem's resilience is directly related to the variety of genetic information to be found within it: the narrower the variety of organisms present there, the more fragile it is. By analogy, we can say that sociotechnical systems based on a single rationale and a single operative strategy (even when carefully studied and optimized) would behave similarly to a natural ecosystem containing a narrow variety of organisms (however highly specialized): they would be fragile systems, risking catastrophic breakdown. To make human civilizations more enduring, therefore, we should enhance the complexity of technical systems. That is, we should foster the coexistence of solutions based on different logics and different rationales. In addition, we should consider the varied complexity of energy, production, market, economy, and cultural systems as the "genetic richness" of an artificial ecosystem: a richness that guarantees its capacity to continue evolving in the face of wider changes in context.⁵ To clarify, we know that natural ecosystems are different from artificial ones. However, both are part of the general category of adaptive complex systems. For this reason, what we have observed in natural ecosystems is also valid for sociotechnical ones.7 To last over time, the latter too must be built of a multiplicity of largely independent subsystems and be based on a variety of strategies. In short, they must be diverse and complex, given that these are the basis of their adaptability. ## Two opposite directions How far are we from this complex, resilient manmade system? In my view, this question has no single, simple answer: contemporary society demonstrates a contradictory dynamism that forces us, on this point as on many others, to describe what is happening as a double trend: a mainstream one, carried over from the last century, and the new, emerging one that we are dealing with here. The two trends coexist and compete. In this competition we can see, on one side, the big dinosaurs of the twentieth century, promoting large production plants, hierarchical system architectures, process simplification, and standardization. And last but not least, they are destroying the old places without creating new ones. The result of this trend is an increase in the overall fragility of the system driven by reduction of biological and sociocultural diversity and the consequent desertification of the overall natural and sociocultural environment. On the other side, we can see the small and connected entities of the new emerging world moving in the opposite direction, toward light, flexible, context-related distributed systems. They are the drivers of the emerging idea of a small, local, open, and connected world, the SLOC scenario presented in the previous chapter. Here we can add that this scenario in particular is created by rebuilding places and connected communities, with the regeneration of the natural and sociocultural environment that contains them. So the building of these new places and these new communities is a fundamental part of every strategy that aims to create a sustainable society, one that is necessarily resilient. ## A new territorial ecology So far, in dealing with sustainability and resilience I have been referring to sociotechnical systems. To go further into the significance of the micro scale. I have introduced the idea of place, meaning an inhabited, natural and social system. Now, in order to move on to the macro level (macro systems that include a multiplicity of places), I will refer to the concept of the territory. "A territory is the historical outcome of the processes in the long-term joint evolution of the human settlement and the environment, and nature and culture. It is thus the product of the transformation of the environment through successive cycles of civilization."8 This definition of “territory" (given by the Italian Territorialist School, and rather different from that in common use in English-speaking countries) implies looking at the sociotechnical system in which we live, and which we contribute to produce, also in terms of its natural and cultural history. It means acknowledging that although its character and its identity are human constructs, they actually existed long before each of us and will continue to exist after our lifetime. This way of looking at things is particularly important when dealing with the question of sustainability, where it is necessary to maintain a long-term, overall view of one's own actions; when we know that we must consider all the characteristics of ecosystems, even those that are of no apparent use to us human beings; and when we want to consider periods of time that are outside our normal time scales. In short, this way of looking at things is indispensable when we realize that our planet is not something to be used but an ecosystem to be respected and safeguarded. Thus, when we refer to territory, we must consider not only the complex, ecosystemic nature of the sociotechnical systems in question,9 but also its history, identity, and lifespan. In the Territorialist School definition, a territory is an ecosystem "made up of places."1º Thus it appears that there is a double link between places and territory. The quality of a territory depends on the places that go to make it up, on what they are like, how they are transformed, and ultimately on the way they combine to give it shape and substance. In turn, the quality of these places exists only in the wider framework of what their particular territory permits. Furthermore, if—in keeping with my previous definition—a place is a space with its own identity and history, the existence of the territory cannot be separated from that of the communities that, in time, have produced it and which now acknowledge its identity and history. So there is a close relationship between the existence and the quality of a territory and that of the communities which live in it, and by living in it produce places and keep them alive. Thus if a territory is an ecosystem of places and communities, the building or rebuilding of those places and communities in all their variety and cultural richness also leads to the production of a richer, more varied ecosystem, one that is therefore more resilient. In short it leads to a new territorial ecology.11 We can therefore say that when collaborative organizations operate as place makers, they contribute not only to the creation of more livable places but also to improvements in the territorial ecology of the city and regions in which they operate. This definition of territory, as an ecosystem of places and communities that live in it, also gives us a clear meaning for “sustainable development" when referring to a territorial system: if a territory is an ecosystem, and if, as we know, the richer an ecosystem is in terms of diversity the greater is its ability to stand up to stress, it follows that the first and fundamental step toward its sustainable development will be its enrichment in terms of places, activities, resident communities, and all the social, economic, and cultural variety that this can lead to. ## Planning by projects The SLOC scenario, as I previously outlined, offers a vision that, if socially shared, permits aligning a variety of actions toward a new territorial ecology: a vision that unites the micro of places to the macro of wider sociotechnical ecosystems. We shall call this way of operating planning by projects. Planning by projects is therefore a bottom-up design intervention on a territorial scale, working from places and communities and using the force of social innovation as one of its main drivers. It starts with the people, the networks they create, the motivations that spur them to be active and to collaborate, and the energy they dedicate to doing it. This kind of planning is also the ground on which design experts can make a specific contribution, by promoting and sustaining organizations that act as place makers. To do so, they can collaborate with other interested social actors to design conditions that foster specific projects with place-making communities, and to feed the social conversation with visions and ideas on what the local, urban or regional, future could be like. To make the discussion more concrete I shall give a few examples: cases of territorial intervention in which expert design has played a particularly important role. One of the better known is Dott07—Design of the Time 2007, a program promoted by the British Design Council in Northumbria. John Thackara, who was the program director, presents it in this way: "Dott07, a year of community projects, events and exhibitions based in North east England, explored what life in a sustainable region could be like-—and how design can help us get there. ... The focus of the initiative was on grassroots community."1² Dott07, like the similar program Dott Cornwall in 2010,13 was one of the first to use design expertise in the way we are dealing with here: to promote a multiplicity of local projects in one region, with the explicit aim of giving the whole region a new dynamism. Since then, several other initiatives have used expert design in a similar way in other parts of the world. These range from improving conditions of life in slums, in favelas, and generally in informal, underserved settlements,¹4 to seeking to create safer cities,15 creating new distributed infrastructure,1⁶ promoting sustainable development at a regional level,' and so on. These are programs that started with different questions and concerns and intervened at different scales, but which have a common denominator: they promote local activities as a contribution to a new territorial ecology, by considering the territory as an "ecosystem made up of places" and increasing the number, the diversity, the social and economic strength, and the connectedness of those places. ## Two examples To explore what design can do to enhance a new territorial ecology, I shall consider two examples in particular: one in Italy and one in China. Feeding Milan: Energy for Change is an action research project aiming to connect Milanese citizens with an agricultural park bordering the town. To use our terms, it can also be presented as a project aiming to promote a new territorial ecology by fostering multifunctional farms, shortening the food chains through demediated services, implementing collaborative practices, and encouraging new purchasing habits among citizens and a new kind of local tourism (example 10.2). "Feeding Milan," writes Anna Meroni, project coordinator for the design part, "can be seen as an attempt by one community to develop a form of territorial ecology by creating a sustainable foodshed. In this sense, it is an experimental platform for a variety of activity models and modus operandi."19 The design process started from a recognition of the available (social, cultural, and economic) resources and existing best practices. On this basis, a shared and socially recognized vision was built: the vision of a ruralurban area where agriculture flourishes, feeding the city and, at the same time, offering citizens opportunities for various farming- and nature-related activities. Then, to make this vision more concrete, an open-ended series of projects was started, first to achieve certain local results, second to offer a more tangible idea of what life might be like if the vision were fulfilled, and lastly to provide opportunities for further conversations about what to do and what new initiatives to start that might fit with the project. Design Harvest, the Xianqiao Sustainable Community Project, is a program developed on Chongming Island, Shangai, the goal of which is to test a bottom-up strategy to promote sustainable development by integrating urban and rural resources and opportunities (example 10.3). "The Chongming initiative," writes Lou Yongqi, founder of the project, “seeks to use design as a new tool to promote solutions toward a sustainable ## Example 10.2 ## FEEDING MILAN: ENERGY FOR CHANGE, MILAN Feeding Milan: Energy for Change is an action research project funded by Fondazione Cariplo and developed by a partnership between Slow Food Italia, the DESIS Lab at the Politecnico di Milano, and the Università di Scienze Gastronomiche. Its specific field of application is a huge agricultural park bordering the south of the town, the Agricultural Park South. Started in 2010, the project investigates how design for social innovation can help create a local "foodshed" that serves to connect local food production in periurban areas with its consumers in town, through a network of services. Its main actions are supporting existing best practices and resources in the agricultural field; activating resources that are as yet unvalued or are no longer used; and reinforcing the multifunctional nature of the farms by promoting complementary activities (e.g., food catering and agritourism proposals). In practical terms, this is done through an open list of self-standing projects: the Earth Market (a farmers' market for local producers), the Farmer's Food Box (a weekly delivery of local vegetables and fruit), Pick-Your-Own Produce (a do-ityourself service where consumers pick their own fruit); the Local Bread Chain (a pilot activity based on production of local grain and a renovated antique mill to grind the flour); and Zero-Mile Tourism (an initiative aiming to improve farm hospitality and extend the range of the proposed tourism experience). Finally, a digital platform has also been developed to coordinate different activities and facilitate direct contact between urban citizens and farmers. 20 future for rural China. Through a collaborative effort involving multidisciplinary teams, knowledge is being generated relevant to improving the outlook for this island and its people in the coming decades."2i In this case, too, the design process started from recognition of the locally available resources and from a larger vision of a new rural-urban relationship. On this basis several design initiatives have been launched, ranging from concept generation and scenario building, triggering discussion with local people, to working prototypes and full-scale experiments in food production and distribution, the enhancement of local craftsmanship, tourism services, and infrastructure and entrepreneurship. ## Lessons learned Apart from their differences, which are very clearly visible, these projects share some important common traits. In both, an open and open-ended codesign process was started that is, to all intents and purposes, a form of territorial planning. ## Example 10.3 ## THE XIANQIAO SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY PROJECT, CHONGMING ISLAND, SHANGHAI The Xiangiao Sustainable Community Project is a design research initiative developed on Chongming Island, Shanghai. It started in 2007 and has been led by Studio TEKTAO and the College of Design and Innovation at Tongji University, in collaboration with the Chongming Island government, village communities, business partners, and several international universities. It aims to use an "acupunctural design" approach to promote exchange and interaction between rural and urban areas, thus improving living conditions in the countryside. As Chongming is mainly farmland and is very close to Shanghai, the project aims to promote a set of actions, both in Chongming and in Shanghai, to turn their proximity into a mutual advantage. Within this larger framework, the project promotes several initiatives focusing on Xianqiao Village as a pilot case. These design initiatives move on different tracks: concept generation and scenario building, some of which has been done in collaboration with international design schools; creating events in the village to promote the project vision; several research activities; tourism pilot spaces and activities; and finally an open innovation hub and its program of events. “All these design projects are prototypes of visions of the future. Just like acupuncture, which stimulates the key acupoints to generate an effect in the whole meridian system. All these projects will form a strong cooperative network. Bringing inspiration and leadership simultaneously in rural and urban fields, so as to impact on the social system of the entire area.22 In both cases, a program was set up that has acted as a social catalyst, triggering a wider co-design process to which the initiatives of various actors who were different and independent from the original ones also contributed. For example, in the village of Xianqiao some quite autonomous initiatives have started and are moving in the same direction as the original one proposed by the design team; in the case of Parco Sud, activities coherent with the Feeding Milan project have continued operating even after the initial program officially ended. Complementary to what I have just said, we must also acknowledge the multiplicity and variety of design initiatives in both projects: local support initiatives for individual activities; pinpoint initiatives tackling specific practical or cultural issues; framework projects, which seek to coordinate and create synergies. Each of these calls for a variety of skills, and design skills in particular: fostering convergence of actors around a shared vision (scenario design); organizing this shared vision into different workable initiatives (strategic design); designing the required service encounters (service design); and publicizing and setting up effective communication for the entire process (communication design). For both projects, we can also point out that these diverse initiatives, though relatively autonomous, collocate within a course that Anna Meroni and her colleagues in the DESIS Lab in Milan call a social innovation journey: "a non-linear sequence of steps and actions that progressively engage a community and help it to set up and prototype a social innovation." In this sequence, "the role of the designer has to be clear, as well as the exit strategy."23 In other words, the role of design and the output of its work must be clearly defined in every step of the social innovation journey; and in particular, as far as the design team is concerned, the program must end with the actors directly concerned taking over responsibility for the project and its results. A further observation is that, in both cases, the promoting design team played the dual role of process facilitator and design activist. Obviously, the way this happened, and the weight of each component, was influenced by the difference in context. Feeding Milan took place in a context where organizations oriented in the same direction as the project were already operating, and therefore its role was mainly that of accelerator and facilitator of processes already under way. On Chongming Island, on the other hand, the initial situation was much less mature, and, at least at the beginning, the initiatives had to be firmly oriented toward design activism.24 Finally, it must be added that, in their different ways, both projects created a physical place as the visible, tangible center of activities (or at least of some of them). In the Xianqiao sustainable community project, an innovation hub has been created. This hub works as a catalyst of ideas, an incubator of new initiatives, and a tangible demonstration that new economic models and wavs of living are viable and could be desirable. A similar choice was made for the Feeding Milan project, where an Ideas Sharing Stall was set up inside the farmers'market (which has been one of the first outputs of the project): a stand where the Feeding Milan design expert team discusses emerging ideas for new services with both citizens and farmers. In this way. the stall, and the whole market, has become a physical platform, integrated by a digital one, that creates a lively hybrid hub for discussions and experimentation. Generalizing, we can say that projects of this kind are a form of regional planning, based on a number of different actions. A first cluster of them aims at creating a framework. It is a broad, complex framework project including various design initiatives, e.g., mapping the existing state of things (focusing not only on problems but also on favorable circumstances, such as the natural, cultural, economic, and social resources available); observing and connecting interested stakeholders and social innovators (those already active and those who could plausibly be activated, given a more favorable environment); and creating a coalition of interested actors and, with them, generating a shared vision (i.e., a scenario and its main implementation strategies). The second cluster of actions includes a suite of local projects that aim to achieve specific results while also serving as an anticipation of a possible future. In other words they seek to satisfy immediate, local requests, but at the same time they are prototypes of how things could be and therefore give tangible evidence of the scenario's viability. Given its particular architecture, planning by projects is a form of planning that enables large-scale, highly flexible programs to be conceived and developed that are intrinsically scalable and adaptable over time, and that are geared to improve the territorial ecology. ## Planners and designers These two examples of planning call for a multiplicity of actors and a variety of skills, among which are those of design. The fact that, in these particular cases, design experts are also their promoters (in the Chinese case) or co-promoters (in the Italian one) is accidental. What is not accidental is that design, applied to initiatives such as these, can make an important contribution. For expert design, participating in planning processes is still something new (as I have already said in chapter 2, in the past design experts tended to work without reference to place). Given this tradition, it could be useful to clarify their present relationship with the other participants in the planning process and, in particular of course, with the planners. To cut a long story short, despite their differences, in several recent cases planners and designers have converged toward similar projects and similar approaches. Planners, who have traditionally operated on a large scale, have recognized the importance of the small scale and redefined their work starting with places and the communities that inhabit them (box 10.1). Conversely, design experts, who have traditionally dealt with the small scale and with projects that appeared to be independent of place, are increasingly involved in place-making processes and consequently in the transformation of wider territorial areas. This is happening due to the effect ## Box 10.1 ## Planning, places, communities Among the lines of regional and urban planning, the one promoted by the Italian Territorialist School is based on an idea and practice of urban and regional planning centering on what is known as local self-sustainable development.2⁵ This is local development based on a balance among three factors: capacity to meet human needs (material and cultural); near self-sufficiency and local self-government; and environmental improvement. Another line, which starts from different experiences and cultural backgrounds but arrives at similar positions, is one that runs in the United States from Jane Jacobs²⁶ to community-based planning.²7 Jacobs introduced the idea that a city is like an ecosystem that depends on a mix of uses and planning based on community. From here emerged community-based planning, a way of planning that starts with the inhabitants and their local social networks. The noteworthy aspect of these two lines, which are emblematic of a vast range of positions, is that they advocate territorial planning in which bottomup intervention, from the places and the communities that inhabit them, is as important as top-down (in the two positions mentioned, it is actually more important). By making this move, by placing people, communities, and production activities at the center of their attention, these ways of planning operate on a field in which, by its very nature, design for social innovation is also active. of sociotechnical innovation on design and the deep transformation it has generated (which I outlined in chapter 2). What contribution can design, and specifically design for social innovation, bring to this new mode of urban and regional designing? As the examples show, it participates in various areas where it has expertise,²⁸ but its most distinctive contribution is the point of view it adopts: it looks at places, and therefore at cities and territories, through the eyes of the people and communities who live there (a human-centered approach), with particular attention to those who are acting, or have the potential to act, as social innovators, connecting their own interests (and those of people close to them) with those of society at large, and of the entire planet. So it focuses on people who are starting (or have the possibility to start) to put into practice a new idea of well-being: a sustainable well-being that, as we have seen in many of the cases of social innovation presented, is linked to the quality of the context, thus of place and territory as a whole. ## Cosmopolitan localism Place building can therefore carry considerable weight in the definition of a new idea of well-being. But this positive prospect is not the only possible result of the rediscovery of places that we are seeing today-not the only countertendency to the dominant tendency toward the economic and cultural desertification of territories. A second one leads to a regressive localism, produced by closed communities, preoccupied with defining borders and building walls against “others." Faced with this risk, how can we propose a localism that is able to regenerate territory and avoid falling into the trap of regressive localism (and the social catastrophe it generates)? In this case too, social innovation and collaborative organizations have much to tell us: their various locality-oriented initiatives are generating an idea of “local" that is a balance between being rooted in a given place and community and being open to global flows of ideas, information, and people. Of course, this balance can be upset, easily tipping over into a hermetic closure to the outside world or, on the contrary, into an openness to any kind of influence, including those that destroy the locally specific features of the social fabric. Nevertheless, when this balance is successfully achieved, the resulting localities and communities are exactly what is needed to promote not only new territorial ecology and a resilient ecosystem, but also a sustainable well-being. I think that what social innovation is indicating, with its idea of a wellbeing based on the quality of places and communities, is the seed of a new culture. Or better, of a metaculture which could be the platform for a multiplicity of cultures. Using an expression introduced by Wolfgang Sachs,29 I call it cosmopolitan localism: the culture of a society in which places and communities are not isolated entities but become nodes in a variety of networks. These are connected places and communities in which short networks generate and regenerate the local social and economic fabric, while long ones connect those particular places and their resident communities with the rest of the world. Most importantly, they are places and communities that bring variety into the overall ecosystem, helping us to create a resilient planet where it will be possible for us and for future generations to live, and hopefully to live well. "After all," Sachs writes, "it is only from places that variety crops up, because it is in places that people weave the present into their particular thread of history."30