to open a conversation on social innovation that places alongside the fundamental issue of problem solving another, which in my opinion is equally important, that of the sense of things. This means discussing the cultural dimension of social innovation and how this cultural innovation may be supported by an innovative design culture. The book seeks to contribute to an international debate on these themes. It is based on a long series of experiences in various parts of the world which I have had the chance to have while coordinating DESIS, an international network of laboratories located in design schools and focusing on social innovation. On the other hand, I cannot and do not wish to separate myself from the culture I have received in the cultural world I come from. What the book proposes is therefore a contribution to an international debate put forward by a “situated author": an author who is collocated in a context and presents himself, openly, as an expression of a local culture. For this reason, the reflections offered in this book not only take shape from experiences lived, but also and above all they are supported by a system of values and references that come from how and where I have been educated and began to think. My hope is that it may be a useful contribution to the development of a culture that is, as in my view it should be, in a sustainable perspective: a culture that is open to a global conversation, but is also a multiple culture, rich in diversity. An ecology of design cultures that are at the same time open to the world and local; rich in those profound differences that “the local," i.e., being rooted in a place, can offer. In conclusion, I have another hope: that this book may also be a tribute to Italian design culture and to its great history. Indeed I would be happy if it were seen as an Italian design contribution to the emerging issues it deals with. Is there anything that links the Italian design culture that I come from with this participatory design for social innovation? I believe so. But to explain where this conviction comes from would require another book. So, if there are any readers who are really interested, I leave them the task of seeking these connections for themselves.