## A NEW SCALE he first chapter pointed out the special nature of city perception and concluded that the art of urban design must therefore be essentially different from the other arts. The vividness and coherence of the environmental image was singled out as being a crucial condition for the enjoyment and use of the city. This image is the result of a two-way process between observer and observed, in which the external physical shape upon which a designer can operate plays a major role. Five elements of the urban image were distinguished, and their qualities and interrelations discussed at length. Much of the data used in this discussion came from an analysis of the form and public image of the central areas of three American cities. In the course of these analyses, methods of field reconnaissance and sample interviews for imageability were developed. Although most of the work was confined to the identity and structure of single elements, and their patterning in small complexes, it was directed toward a future synthesis of city form considered as a whole pattern. A clear and comprehensive image of the entire metropolitan region is a fundamental requirement for the future. If it can be developed, it will raise the experience of a city to a new level, a level commensurate with the contemporary functional unit. Image organization at this scale involves wholly new design problems. Large-scale imageable environments are rare today. Yet the spatial organization of contemporary life, the speed of movement, and the speed and scale of new construction, all make it possible and necessary to construct such environments by conscious design. This study points out, even if only in an elementary way, one approach to this new kind of design. It is the thesis of these pages that a large city environment can have sensuous form. To design such a form is rarely attempted today: the entire problem is either neglected or relegated to the piecemeal application of architectural or site-planning principles It is clear that the form of a city or of a metropolis will not exhibit some gigantic, stratified order. It will be a complicated pattern, continuous and whole, yet intricate and mobile. It must be plastic to the perceptual habits of thousands of citizens, open-ended to change of function and meaning, receptive to the formation of new imagery. It must invite its viewers to explore the world. True enough, we need an environment which is not simply well organized, but poetic and symbolic as well. It should speak of the individuals and their complex society, of their aspirations and their historical tradition, of the natural setting, and of the complicated functions and movements of the city world. But clarity of structure and vividness of identity are first steps to the development of strong symbols. By appearing as a remarkable and well-knit place, the city could provide a ground for the clustering and organization of these meanings and associations. Such a sense of place in itself enhances every human activity that occurs there, and encourages the deposit of a memory trace. By the intensity of its life and the close packing of its disparate people, the great city is a romantic place, rich in symbolic detail. It is for us both splendid and terrifying, "the landscape of our confusions," as Flanagan calls it.21 Were it legible, truly visible, then fear and confusion might be replaced with delight in the richness and power of the scene. In the development of the image, education in seeing will be quite as important as the reshaping of what is seen. Indeed, they together form a circular, or hopefully a spiral, process: visual education impelling the citizen to act upon his visual world, and this action causing him to see even more acutely. A highly developed art of urban design is linked to the creation of a critical and attentive audience. If art and audience grow together, then our cities will be a source of daily enjoyment to millions of their inhabitants. Appendices 