# Introduction For those who are unfamiliar with the general subject matter of this book, it may be helpful to summarize the overall context of the time. The “Machine Age” is a generic term that refers not just to machines, which had been around in industry for a century before, but to the new way in which the public perceived them. In the middle of the 1920s, people suddenly realized that mechanical machines were not just for large-scale industrial purposes, but that they actually could purchase machines such as cars, washing machines, refrigerators and vacuum cleaners at affordable prices for personal use around the home. They began to regard machines as personal possessions, rather than abstract technology. At the same time, people also became aware of style, a quality previously considered only in decorative products for display in the home, but of little significance in functional, mechanical products, such as their new household appliances. Now that they were able to afford such products, and regarded them as personal possessions, however, they were extremely proud of them and wanted them to be seen by friends and neighbors as evidence of their increasing financial success. So they wanted them in the latest styles, just like some of the recent European designs being promoted by upscale department stores as fashionable. In addition to these new perceptions, people began to realize that they could influence the way these products looked and functioned by expressing their preference of competing products on the market through purchase choice, or through customer surveys, commonly used by advertising agencies. Such public demand soon caused some manufacturers of functional, mechanical products to pay attention to the appearance of their products by engaging artists to redesign them. Most, however, saw no such need, since business was booming, and changing tooling was costly. In the midst of these interrelated developments, the Great Depression hit in 1929, and manufacturers not only lost half of their sales volume, but faced going out of business completely, which many in fact did. They became desperate, and when they learned of industrial designers in 1934, they rushed to locate a design consultant, only to find that the few available were already over their heads with work. Manufacturers' demand for such designers was so intense that it attracted designers from numerous other fields to fill the need, and the industrywide transformation of industrial products into modern styles had begun. It has not stopped since. They were, and are, called industrial designers. Today there are more than 50,000 industrial designers in the United States. By the time the profession of industrial design first became well known, in 1935, there were only about 36 pioneers who were practicing in the field. They came from all walks of life and businesses, mostly in the creative arts, to address a national problem: the economy was as bad as it had ever been, unemployment was at 25 percent, and industry was on life support because consumers were not spending. America was far behind Europe in design, particularly in massproduced electromechanical consumer products, because manufacturers of these products relied solely on engineers for their design. Mechanical products were devoid of humanistic attributes such as attractive appearance, convenience of use, or the latest styles. The pioneer “machine designers," primarily commercial artists, stage designers, and craftsmen, changed all this within a decade, by working with engineers, salesmen, and the public to transform the man-made landscape into what we now call the modern world by redesigning mechanical products to become sleek, stylish, shiny, and attractive. Their creative work attracted consumers, who began spending the money they had been hoarding because of bad economic times. Increased sales reinvigorated industry, brought America out of the Depression, and led to the highest standard of living in the world after World War II. As will be described later, it was the first successful marriage of art and industry, a visionary objective sought by many European design educators since the beginning of the 20th century to provide well-designed products to the masses. Before that, 19th-century craftsmen had dreamed of providing ordinary people with handcrafted designs previously only affordable by the wealthy. Now, in the midst of the Great Depression, the machine designers accomplished this dream by founding a new profession, which created affordable and artistic designs available in mass-produced quantities. The original pioneer designers continued to work diligently, and by the end of the 1930s they dominated the rapidly growing field. After World War II, some headed huge consulting firms or corporate design departments to meet the enormous postwar consumer demand for new and better products. As the leaders of the profession, the pioneers confirmed the status of their activity as a legal profession, established professional organizations, recommended educational programs, implemented codes of ethics, and initiated national annual design awards programs. A few became international celebrities and led the formation of international design organizations, or assisted in the economic and design development of war-torn nations after World War II as design consultants abroad. By the time some of the pioneers approached retirement, they had established large, successful organizations that continue to this day. This is the story of those few dozen pioneers who founded modern industrial design in America and changed the landscape of consumer and industrial products within a decade, one product at a time. 