## What it is Before proceeding to a more analytical observation of what design for social innovation is and how it works, I would like to make it more concrete by describing four noteworthy examples. The first two illustrate what its "normal" way of operating is and what I think will become customary design practice in the twenty-first century. The second two are exceptional cases. the promoters of which have managed to unite the local with a wider national and international dimension, generating profound, large-scale changes. These two extraordinary examples started many years ago but still today indicate a possibility: what design for social innovation can do and, I would add, what it ought to be able to do in order to deal with the problems and opportunities that present themselves today. ## Everyday life projects The first is a well-known example, which we can use as a benchmark of what social innovation design can be, the processes it can support, the results it can achieve, and of course the difficulties it may find. It is the Circle, in the UK: a membership organization of elderly people supported by local neighborhood helpers and professional social workers. It was developed by a design company, Participle Ltd, which moved from an existing idea (the idea of creating a "circle" of peers able and willing to exchange help and care) and build an innovative economic and organizational model around it.¹ To do so, it systemized the different motivations and resources and started a co-design process capable of activating a large number of potentially interested actors right from the start. In short, Participle managed to create a coalition model in which public and private actors, local associations, individual volunteers, and elderly people agree on the idea of a circle of care and, working from their different positions, start acting to create it. The model raised the interest of several councils in London and in other UK cities, and the number of Circles increased. However, we must note that some of them have since been closed as public funding ended (example 3.1). The second example concerns a program of activities focusing on collaborative housing, developed by the DESIS Lab at the Politecnico di Milano in collaboration with a partner network. The first stage of the program was to concentrate on cohousing, creating a platform of promotional services ## Example 3.1 ## CIRCLE, UK Circle was first proposed by Participle, a London-based social enterprise, in 2007. Participle succeeded in building a public-private partnership (with Southwark Council, Sky, and the Department for Work and Pensions) and in starting up a co-design process involving over 250 elderly people and their families. The first prototype was launched in Southwark in 2009. The result was the definition of a new service idea based on an innovative economic and organizational model that includes horizontal p2p collaboration and mutual help, and vertical collaboration in terms of voluntary and paid work. A digital platform was to coordinate the variety of activities that the Circle would offer and organize. On the basis of this service idea, the first prototype was launched in Southwark in 2009. Since then, seven other Circles have been started in the UK, and other local councils have expressed their interest. In 2014 some of these Circles were closed, including the Southwark one, as public funding came to an end. Hilary Cottam, Participle's principal partner, has commented: "What has failed, in some cases, but not all, is the ability to find the finance to scale them up and the vision to embed them as part of the wider eco-system of public services."² and activating a co-design project for some cohousing communities in the Milan area (a dedicated company was set up for the purpose: Cohousing. it).3 The second stage extended the theme to the more general idea of collaborative housing,⁴ meaning a kind of residential housing in which certain spaces are shared and residents take active part in their design and management. This stage led to various parallel activities: new cohousing projects, master's degree theses, a master's program focusing on the topic,6 and lastly the adoption of the idea of collaborative housing as a social innovation project by Fondazione Housing Sociale (FHS), an important institution in Milan dedicated to developing social housing in Italy (example 3.2).7 In this program's development from its first phase (the cohousing project) to the second (the collaborative housing one), we can recognize an open-ended co-design process driven by evolving coalitions, in which both partners and objectives have changed over time. Since its beginning in 2006, several semi-independent projects have been conceived and enhanced: from the initial survey on potential demand for collaborative housing in Milan, to the digital platform conceived as a cohousing community ## Example 3.2 ## COLLABORATIVE HOUSING PROGRAM, MILAN The cohousing idea has been applied in Europe and worldwide for many years. For several reasons, however, the number of completed cohousing complexes is still very low. Although a growing number of people have expressed interest, various difficulties seem to prevent them from moving on to implement a viable project. Some years ago (2006), this contradiction between potentially interested people and practical fulfilment seemed particularly evident in Italy, and in Milan in particular. Moving from this observation, the DESIS Lab of the Politecnico di Milano, together with a socially oriented enterprise, developed a program aimed at the development of a cohousing project for a larger number of people. The first result of the program was the creation of a dedicated company (Cohousing.it) which has been promoting cohousing initiatives in Milan and has become the model for several other enabling platforms in Milan and other Italian cities, multiplying the number of cohousing initiatives in the country. The second result is that experiences in the first phase became the basis for other initiatives, such as a doctoral thesis and a new master's program at the Politecnico di Milano specifically dedicated to the issue of collaborative housing. It aims to multiply these experiences and develop further reflection on them. Finally, and most importantly, these experiences have been further developed by the Fondazione Housing Sociale (Social Housing Foundation, FHS)—an institution dedicated to the support of social housing in Italy. FHS now integrates the notion of collaborative housing in its programs, utilizing several design ideas and tools from previous cohousing experience.⁸ organizer, to specific initiatives and dedicated toolkits, cultural programs to promote collaborative living values, and master's programs and doctoral theses studying them in greater depth and developing new conceptual and practical tools.º This example has also taught us another important lesson: having initiated the first phase of the project with a research orientation, it has been possible to transfer the experience acquired not only to other parallel projects but also to the various different initiatives in the second phase. In short, we can say that the collaborative housing program can be seen as an open-ended co-design process, where every design activity, considered as part of a larger design research program, created new design knowledge: knowledge that was transferable from one project to another. Even though these two cases (Circle and the collaborative housing program) are different in many ways, they have some common characteristics that can be generalized regarding both their process and the specificity of the design role in promoting and supporting them. In terms of process, their relatively long histories demonstrate how social innovation can develop from an original social invention (the ideas of a circle of care and of cohousing) to more structured prototypes and social enterprises. They also show the importance of a correct interplay between autonomous initiatives, with the social enterprises they may generate, and public institutions: these social innovations are living entities that can survive and flourish only in a favorable environment, and creating this favorable regulatory and economic ecosystem is the specific contribution that the national and local institutions should bring to the process. In terms of the design role, several observations can be made. The most basic one is that in both cases, the first move of design experts has been to use their skills and competences to recognize existing social inventions and transform them into more effective, attractive, lasting, and potentially replicable solutions. This observation can be generalized. Traditionally, design experts were asked to recognize technological innovation and translate it into socially acceptable products and services. This activity, of course, remains valid. But now, to support social innovation, something else has to be done. The bridge between technology and society has to be trodden in the opposite direction too. In fact, to promote social innovation, design experts must use their design skills and competences to recognize promising cases when and where they appear and to reinforce them. That is, to help them to be more accessible, effective, lasting, and replicable. A second common characteristic is that both examples used admittedly advanced but still “normal" skills and capabilities (taken from all the design disciplines, from product design to service design, from communication to interior design, from interaction design to strategic design). Both of them also show that two of these design disciplines are particularly relevant to design for social innovation: service design (to conceive and develop solution ideas that take into account the quality of the interactions involved) and strategic design (to promote and support partnerships between the different actors involved). Design for social innovation is not a new design discipline. It is the application of what, today, design as a whole should be. It follows that, to promote and support social innovation, all the design skills and capabilities are used, blended in different ways case by case. We can also observe that strategic and service design components are included in all these cases. A third common trait is that in both examples the activities that take place are supported by an appropriate set of products, services, and communication activities. For instance, in the cohousing example, starting up and co-designing have been enabled by creating a dedicated digital platform and a set of services (to support the meetings of the potential cohousers, the building of the community, and the co-designing of services to be shared). In parallel to that, a co-design tool has been designed to facilitate the overall design process A similar platform, not only for communication but also for organizing, has been set up for the different Circles. In both cases, these platforms, services, and co-design and co-production support tools constitute the enabling solution that has made each individual intervention more accessible to the people concerned. In addition, it has made them more easily and more effectively replicable (and both of them have actually been replicated). The general observation that we can draw from all this is that appropriate enabling solutions can not only sustain a single action but also create a scaling-out effect: the creation of horizontal synergies that lead to the replication of the most promising solutions in other contexts (I shall come back to this point in chapter 9). ## Big changes Now I shall move on to two cases that succeeded in uniting a multiplicity of local initiatives into a general vision, and transforming this vision into a project for change on a much larger scale. I am referring here to the work of two great Italian social innovators, Franco Basaglia and Carlo Petrini, and the associations they created, Democratic Psychiatry and Slow Food. Basaglia and Petrini are two extraordinary characters who worked with widely differing problems, adopting a similar approach and radically changing the then dominant ways of seeing and doing things (regarding mental illness on the one hand and the quality of food and food systems on the other). To avoid misunderstanding, I must stress immediately that neither Basaglia nor Petrini are officially designers. In my opinion, however, both of them are, to all intents and purposes, great innovators and, de facto, designers. And their stories say a lot about what designers could and should do in this field. Franco Basaglia was an exceptional psychiatrist who, in the seventies, founded the democratic psychiatry movement. In practical terms what he did was to close the psychiatric hospital in Trieste (a city in the northeast of Italy), where he was director, and at the same time start up cooperative production and service groups which brought ex-patients, nurses, and doctors together in enterprises that had to be effective in economic terms (real enterprises, not entities whose very existence depends on financial backing from the state). In doing this, Basaglia proposed a more general discussion on democracy and civilization (it is not by chance that the movement is called democratic psychiatry) and, at the same time, he clearly indicated that this process had to be adequately supported: that there had to be facilities (services, places, and tools) to enable people (in this case the mentally ill) to overcome their difficulties and fulfill their potential capabilities (example 3.3). Carlo Petrini, who founded the slow food movement in 1989, followed a similar course, generating a radical new vision of what an advanced food ## Example 3.3 ## DEMOCRATIC PSYCHIATRY, ITALY "Opening the institution [the psychiatric hospital] does not signify opening a door, it means opening ourselves toward the 'patient.' I would say we are starting to have confidence in these people."1º Basaglia's (and democratic psychiatry's) theme was mental illness, and his revolutionary (for the times) approach was to see a person with a mental disability not only as a patient but also as an individual with capabilities. When seen only as a patient, such a person retreats into his or her illness; but if we see the patient as a person, we can support him or her to overcome these problems and find fulfillment in some positive activity. Nowadays the path laid out more than 40 years ago in Trieste by Basaglia has become normal practice in Italy (or at least it should be). In 1978, thanks to him, a national law was passed that opened up all psychiatric hospitals and set up new forms of assistance to the mentally ill. Since then restaurants, holiday villages, hotels, and carpentry workshops have started up, all run by "madmen." Many of these activities have worked well. Some have become really successful commercial enterprises (e.g., a cooperative of expatients is currently running a bar, restaurant, and bookshop in the ex-psychiatric hospital in Milan, and every year organizes an important cultural festival). system could be like. Adopting a strategic design approach, he created a number of local organizations to enable previously weak farmers to produce high-quality products and find channels for their sale at a fair price to consumers capable of recognizing their quality. In so doing, slow food set up a whole system of products and services aiming to empower the social actors involved and, at the same time, to protect the quality of traditional products and productions, and therefore the local cultures and economies involved and, ultimately, their physical environments (example 3.4). These two examples, like the previous ones, have common traits that are worth highlighting. The first and, in this case, most apparent is the role of the promoters: both examples show clearly how the events that led to these two great social innovations cannot be separated from the personalities, energy, and charisma of their promoters. However, we must also say that both owe their success and their long-lastingness to another special ability of Basaglia and Peterini: their capacity to create around themselves a group of capable enthusiasts, to create an organization and also act on an institutional level. Ultimately, if the processes they were able to activate have consolidated into lasting organizations and institutions, it is because both of them knew how to operate on all these levels, and they did so extremely well. ## Example 3.4 ## SLOW FOOD, ITALY (AND WORLDWIDE) "We believe that everyone has a fundamental right to pleasure and consequently the responsibility to protect the heritage of food, tradition and culture that makes this pleasure possible." This is the first sentence of the slow food manifesto written by Carlo Petrini in 1989 to found, with friends, the international slow food movement. This manifesto goes on to say: "We consider ourselves co-producers, not consumers, because by being informed about how our food is produced and actively supporting those who produce it, we become a part of and a partner in the production."1 In other words, slow food proposed a new way of looking at food consumption, but not only that. Driven by the same basic motivation, slow food has operated on the supply and valorization of food products that otherwise would gradually have disappeared, as they were not economically viable in the economics of the dominant agroindustrial system. In practical terms, it has cultivated food awareness on the demand side (through the actions of consumer-producer organizations: the Condotte, known outside Italy as Convivia) and consequently a market for these high-quality products. On the supply side, it has addressed farmers, breeders, fishermen, and the firms that process their products, and with them it has promoted local organizations (the Presidia) to back them by connecting them to each other and to their market. Several general lessons can be drawn from all this. First, social inventions and the early stages of social innovation may come about, and indeed often do come about, thanks to the personalities and energy of a few "social heroes." However, to last over time, to grow and multiply, linking the local to a larger scale, requires organization and the creation of a more favorable cultural, economic, and institutional environment. The second common characteristic is that these cases clearly show how design for social innovation is (or should be) an inextricable tangle of farreaching, culturally profound visions of how the world could be improved, of a special capacity to relate to people directly concerned and give them a voice, and an equally special creativity needed to imagine feasible solutions and create the conditions to tap the social energy available. In other words, this evident common trait confirms the critical, cultural and creative dimension of design for social innovation. Without it, neither democratic psychiatry nor slow food could have existed. A third important characteristic concerns their strategic dimension. Each of these movements started by identifying a problem in both its local and its general dimension. From there, each produced both a deep and far-reaching vision and a feasible proposal for local action (yet capable of producing radical change). In this procedure, general proposals are made tangible by successful, concrete, local actions. Vice versa, local initiatives are made stronger by being part of a wider vision and design: a "framework design" focused on creating a more favorable culture, institutional system and public policy. ## A first definition To help frame a discussion of what design for social innovation is and what it does, I will propose a rough but, in my view, already meaningful definition: Design for social innovation is everything that expert design can do to activate, sustain, and orient processes of social change toward sustainability. By giving this definition I simply mean that, in order to talk about this topic, we do not need to introduce new models or new definitions, beyond those we have already used when discussing design in general and the forms it takes in the networked world. Design for social innovation (from now on this expression will be used to mean social innovation toward sustainability) is not a new kind of design: it is one of the ways in which contemporary design already functions. However, since it requires a special sensitivity and a few conceptual and operational tools, it seems to me useful to give it a name and focus on its peculiarities. By the above definition, design for social innovation refers to a vast field resulting from the intersection of the entire range of social innovation phenomena (outlined in chapter 1) with expert design in all its contemporary shapes and forms (outlined in chapter 2). It is therefore a constellation of activities, each characterized by a different sense of these two terms. The vast range of possibilities that emerge do, however, have one common trait: they are all contributions to the social conversation about what to do and how do it. This is really a collection of conversations for action that in Terry Winograd's words (and in the spirit of the Language/Action perspective) are "the central coordinating structures for human organizations."12 In our case, these conversations occur between various social actors who are all interested in achieving the same result (i.e., in resolving a problem or opening a new possibility), and who follow an innovative path to achieve it, breaking with established ways of thinking and doing things. This social conversation is, to all intents and purposes, a co-designing activity: a dynamic process in which participants intervene bringing their own particular knowledge and designing capacity. Among these there are obviously also design experts who express their skills and abilities in social innovation design. We can say, then, that design for social innovation is the expert design contribution to a co-design process aiming at social change. In practical terms, it is a blend of different components: original ideas and visions (from design culture), practical design tools (from different design disciplines), and creativity (which is a personal gift), within the framework of a design approach (deriving from previous reflexive design experience). ## What it is not To focus more clearly on what design for social innovation is and what it does, it is helpful to pause a moment and also consider what it is not and what it does not do. ## Not all design is design for social innovation The first and most obvious assertion to make is that, although the definition of design for social innovation is very wide, this does not mean that all design is part of it. Design for social innovation entails a sociotechnical transformation driven by and oriented toward social change. Not all transformations have these characteristics: there are, and there will always be, changes in the overall system, and therefore also in its social dimension, that are driven by technical innovation. The appearance of a new material, a new functional technology, or a new production system has always led to the designing of products, services, and systems that may have considerable social effects. In these cases, however, we do not talk about design for social innovation, because the driving force in this transformation is technological and not social. Obviously, the distinction is easier to make in some cases than in others. I have already talked about this in chapter 1 when discussing innovation in sociotechnical systems: the more far-reaching and diffuse the interface between technology and society, the faster and more far-reaching will be their impact on the social systems in which they operate. And vice versa: the more people are exposed to these technologies, the greater their opportunity and capability to absorb them and understand how they can be used or adapted for different purposes. When things are like this, in my opinion it is not particularly useful to discuss whether something is technical or social innovation. The same is true for its design. ## Social design is not (though it could be) design for social innovation The notion of design for social innovation is frequently considered as similar, if not identical, to that of social design. In my view, this is an error: the two expressions refer to different activities and have very different implications. The problem begins with the double meaning commonly attributed to the adjective "social." The first sense, which is the one in use in the expression design for social innovation, refers to social forms as such; that is, to the way in which a society is built.13 In the second sense it indicates the existence of particularly problematic situations (such as extreme poverty, illness, or social exclusion, and circumstances after catastrophic events) to which both the market and the state fail to find solutions, and which therefore pose (or should pose) the need for urgent intervention from some other quarter. It is in this second meaning that the adjective made its entrance into the design debate several decades ago, generating the expression social design (box 3.1).¹4 Design for social innovation starts from quite different premises. The first, as already mentioned, is that it takes “social" in its more precise sense (that is, related to the ways in which people generate social forms). The second is that what it produces are meaningful social innovations; that is, solutions based on new social forms and economic models. The third is that it deals with all kinds of social change toward sustainability: the ones that concern the poor, of course, but also the ones that concern the middle and upper classes, changes making it possible for them to reduce ## Box 3.1 ## Social design In its original meaning, social design is a design activity that deals with problems that are not dealt with by the market or by the state, and in which the people involved do not normally have a voice (for the simple reason that they do not have the economic or political means to generate a formal demand). From here arises the noble ethical nature of social design. But also its limit: if the people involved in these socially sensitive issues do not express a formal demand, neither can they sustain the costs of design; and therefore design experts must work for free, in a charity mode (in some cases, they can work for a charity organization and be paid for that; however, this occurs within the framework of initiatives that, on the whole, are charitable in nature). By implication, there is a normal design that operates in economic terms, and another that is promoted out of ethical motivations and in a charity mode. Thus social design is intrinsically a complementary activity: a design that, to exist, asks for someone else who can and will generously pay for it. their environmental impact, regenerate common goods, and reinforce the social fabric. For this reason, design for social innovation, though still very far from being mainstream, is not intrinsically a complementary design activity. It is, or at least it could be, a forerunner of the design of the twenty-first century. And therefore, and very pragmatically, it proposes a design activity in which, if the more favorable scenario should be realized, the majority of design experts could have a role and make their living. It should be added that, in contemporary reality, this differentiation between social design and design for social innovation tends to blur, as the two tend to converge and create areas of objective (and very productive) overlap. Social design is increasingly oriented toward social innovation, recognizing that this offers the only chance for solving the problems it traditionally deals with. In turn, design for social innovation, facing the extension of the economic crisis, is more and more frequently involved in initiatives that involve socially sensitive issues. ## It is not just a process facilitator In my experience, the design expert's role in co-design processes is very often reduced to a narrow, administrative activity, where creative ideas and design culture tend to disappear: an activity in which design experts take a step backward and consider their role simply as that of "process facilitators." Or better put, they consider their facilitator role in a very narrow way: to ask other actors for their opinions and wishes, write them on small pieces of paper, and stick them on the wall and then synthesize them, following a more or less formalized process. We can call this way of doing things post-it design. In my view, expert design's contribution to co-design processes, and therefore also to social innovation, should be much more than that. Design is a specific culture, and design experts should be selected for their creativity and trained to use that creativity to transform their design culture into visions and proposals. This design culture and this creativity are what design experts should bring to social innovation and to the codesign processes that support it. The problem is, of course, how to do so without falling into the old "big-ego design" approach, i.e., without trying to impose the design expert's visions and ideas as if they were the only possible solution (box 3.2). ## Box 3.2 ## Big-ego design and post-it design Big-ego design is left over from the last century's demiurgic vision, in which design was the act of particularly gifted individuals capable of imprinting their personal stamp on artifacts and environments. Even though this may still mean something in some very specific design fields, this way of thinking and doing becomes highly dangerous when applied to complex social problems. Therefore, it is important to react against the idea that design in general may be reduced to big-ego design. Post-it design is a way of seeing the design process that emerges from the positive idea of considering all the social actors, ordinary citizens included, as potential resources for the solution of a given problem: as people with something significant to bring to the design process. For sure, the post-it design approach is also motivated by a reaction against big-ego design. The problem is that, starting from this intention of countering big-ego design, postit design ends up by transforming design experts into administrative actors, with no specific contributions to bring, other than aiding the process with their post-its (and at the end, maybe, with some pleasing visualizations). In other words, from the post-it design perspective the design process is reduced to a polite conversation around the table of some participatory design exercise. In my view, the social conversation on which the co-design process is based is much more than that. I think the way to avoid this risk is to consider design actions as a blend of creativity, design culture, and dialogic collaboration, where the first two must be paralleled by the third (and vice versa).15 In fact, co-designing is a process in which everybody is allowed to bring ideas, even though these ideas could, at times, generate problems and tensions. In the end, what makes this complex mesh of initiatives a design process is the fact that the actors involved will be willing and able to listen to each other, to change their minds and converge toward a common view on the outcomes to be obtained. In short, this means that they are willing and able to establish dialogic cooperation, i.e., in Richard Sennett's words, a social conversation that “entails a special kind of openness":16 a conversation in which listening is as important as speaking (because it enables interlocutors to understand and empathize with a different point of view and, on this basis, search for solutions). Therefore, in my view, design experts should be at the same time critical, creative, and dialogic. That is, they should feed the conversation with visions and ideas (using their personal skills and specific culture), listen to the feedback from other interlocutors (as well as, more in general, listening to feedback from the whole environment in which they operate), and then, in view of the feedback, they should introduce new, more mature proposals into the conversation. ## Making things happen To avoid both the post-it and big-ego design risks, design experts should cultivate their specific creativity and culture and their dialogic capability at the same time. We must stress that dialogic capability in the sense Sennett intends is not the application of a method but a very special skill: a kind of craft to be learned through practical exercises and experiences. The result is that they, the design experts, should consider their creativity and culture as tools to support the capability of other actors to design in a dialogic way. In other words, they should agree to be part of a broad design process that they can trigger, support, but not control. Once they accept this view of themselves, and assume this blend of creativity, design knowledge, and dialogic capability as their specific cultural and operational profile, design experts are in a position to become effective agents of change. They spark off new initiatives, feed social conversations, and help the process of convergence toward commonly recognized visions and outcomes. In short, they make things happen. In my view, "to make things happen, to listen to the feedback and reorient the action," is the most concise (and precise) way of describing the design expert's role in the co-designing processes that we normally refer to when talking about design for social innovation. ## How it works Design for social innovation acts within open-ended processes through a multiplicity of design initiatives which have their own well-defined modes, timelines, and results. This way of acting, which is a distinctive feature of expert design, must be properly understood. If it is not, various kinds of problems may arise at the conceptual and practical levels. ## Thinking and acting by projects Expert design is an activity in which people think and act by projects: they break the continuity of events and imagine a change in the state of things and how to bring it about. This has always been so (see what in chapter 2 I have called "design mode"), but in the past, when design was mainly product-oriented, the activity of the design expert equaled designing a product. Consequently, the design initiative began with the start of the product design process and ended, or apparently ended,19 with the realization of the product itself. Today, and specifically when operating on social innovation, things are no longer like this. In today's turbulent environment, organizations evolve over time, calling for a constant upgrading of their way of working. This is why the initiative of design experts must be developed in such a way that it can, in due course, be appropriately concluded. It must be able to reach a point where the partners who are directly concerned can become autonomous and take over the co-designing and co-production activities which may later arise. As Anna Meroni writes with reference to the development of this kind of project, the action of design experts may and indeed must accompany those directly interested until a special kind of prototype has been created, after which it will be up to those interested to decide the following moves. "The 'special' kind of prototype ... is something that contributes to qualify and distinguish the method: it is, in fact, not a simple functional test of potential innovation, but is an engaging event (or sequence of events) which aims to activate the social innovators to move the initiative ahead and become independent of the designers. It is, in other words, a farewell action that must be carefully planned as a part of the exit strategy of the project."20 It seems to me that Andrea Botero is also moving along the same lines when, in describing the role of design in a social innovation process that leads to the creation of new organizations, she writes that, at a certain point, it is a question of "bridging them to the future horizons of the communal endeavor." This calls for “a type of engagement I will call tentatively here 'midwifing' ... the caring and accompanying aspects before, during and after that are necessary to bridge communal endeavors towards a variety of possible horizons."21 ## Designing coalitions and design programs Every design initiative is the result of coordinated action by a group of social actors who have come to an agreement about what to do and how to do it. These designing coalitions (chapter 2, "Networks and coalitions" section) do not emerge by chance; they are themselves the result of design: an activity proper to the discipline of strategic design that seeks to identify a suitable group of partners and build with them a set of shared values and converging interests. Although every design initiative calls for a coalition that fosters, develops, and makes it operational, the importance of the necessary strategic activity varies according to the type of project. It is clear that a highly specific design-driven project (such as carrying out and communicating ethnographic research) will respond to a coalition that is easier to imagine and create than would be one necessary for a framework project concerning the transformation of a local area and of a large, complex sociotechnical system. In turn these coalitions define an action program that may include various coordinated initiatives and constitute a coherent succession of stages in a general co-design process. Clearly, given the complexity and turbulence of the world in transition in which we are immersed, these coalitions will have to exercise an elevated strategic and design capacity, so as to be able to adapt to changes and deal with emerging new demands and be capable of taking previous experience into account. It follows that designing the coalition required to actualize the initiative and set out its program is the most delicate, if not the most important, aspect of what design for social innovation does or should do. The designing coalition must certainly include subjects who can bring all the necessary skills to bear, including those of the users/co-producers (who together constitute the design team in a strict sense). However, it must also involve the political figures required to give the ideas that may emerge some hope of success (in that they will promote them in the arenas to which they have access). Building this coalition is then, to all intents and purposes, a strategic design activity in which visionary capacity must combine with dialogic ability. In fact, the coalition must be formed around a vision or program (of what to do and how to do it). At the same time, this vision and program can only take shape in the conversation among actors. Managing the delicate balance between the need to put forward ideas and that of gathering ideas from the others is the first and most fundamental capacity that design experts must show they possess. ## Facilitators, activists, strategists, cultural promoters All the design initiatives we have been talking about should be thought up and implemented as contributions to the social conversation about specific projects, such as a new collaborative organization, but also to the conversation about the future of a city, region, or the planet as a whole. They may also serve different purposes: they may give rise to the conversation itself, or may feed a conversation under way with new ideas, support it with facilitating tools, show its results, or create the conditions for it to start anew in another context. It follows that design experts too, who are the main actors in these designing initiatives, can play widely differing roles. The modality that appears most obvious, though not necessarily the most commonly found, is when design experts facilitate existing cases of social innovation, helping them to become more effective, accessible, and potentially replicable. In doing that, their prerogative is to facilitate the conversation, helping it to take on and maintain a design approach. This can be done by bringing scenarios and proposals into the discussion, as instruments with which to foster the convergence of the various interlocutors on shared visions, or with which to make a more motivated choice between different alternatives. Another modality, less obvious but very widespread and important, is what happens when there are no ongoing social innovations (or they are too weak). In this case design experts become activists, triggering or even initiating new collaborative organizations (replicating good ideas or starting up brand-new ones).2² Naturally, for design experts to become activists does not mean they propose artistic provocation or organize political initiatives, as other social actors may and must do. Design experts operating in design activism mode focus general attention on ways of being and behaving that may be provocative in a certain context, but nevertheless offer opportunities that trigger very profitable discussion ... and, hopefully, action. As we have seen, in other cases the activity to be promoted may be a framework project which, by coordinating a variety of initiatives, creating coalitions, and developing programs, may lead to large systemic changes.23 In these cases, design experts must make best possible use of their strategic design capabilities. For this strategic modality too, design experts must find their own particular way of behaving. This means generating visions and proposals that are able to create collaboration (between actors) and synergies (between different projects); connecting local initiatives with those on a larger scale so they reinforce each other; interweaving economic and technical issues with cultural ones, so that the former make the latter more concrete, and the latter make the former more meaningful. Finally, design experts can feed the social conversations with their specific culture, moving from criticizing the state of things toward presenting new ideas and values, in order to make the whole co-design process more meaningful. In this respect, design experts need to have theories and reflections at their disposal which are also action tools. At the same time, they need to develop actions that are also fertile ground for new reflections, thus generating a positive circle between action and reflection. In other words, they must exercise a critically constructive capacity based on their experience and discussions about their experiences.²4 These four expert design modalities define the field of possibility for the way in which design for social innovation can operate. In reality, design experts place themselves at various points in this field, characterized by different combinations of the four modalities, privileging those that feel closer to their sensitivities and personal capabilities. Potentially, each of them can make a positive contribution. Fulfilment of this potential depends on whether or not they find the right starting point. So finding the most suitable mix of intervention modalities for each context is the first and most fundamental strategic ability that our expert designer must be able to bring into play. Having said this, design experts must be able to operate in these various modalities bringing the viewpoint, culture, and skills proper to design. This means they must guarantee that their way of being facilitators. activists, strategists, and critics of the existent is an expression of their technical culture and competence. This design knowledge is the specific contribution that design experts must bring to the more general codesigning processes in which they participate: knowledge that in part lies in the tradition of design and in part must be produced through opportune research. ## A new design knowledge Where and how is the needed design knowledge produced? Where and how will it be produced in future, given that the demand for it will inevitably grow in the transition toward sustainability? The traditional answer falls on the existence of (and need to develop) public and private research centers.2s However, in my view this answer is incomplete, and more importantly it leads us to think that the design research we are talking about can be limited to a few research professionals. In a connected world this is no longer so. In a connected world, designing networks also tend to become design research networks, producing constructive enquiry at their nodes. ## Design research networks These design research networks are the results of a social as well as technical transformation that is under way. To recognize it, we must consider the emerging scenario in which open-source and peer-to-peer approaches make new organizational frameworks possible. In this scenario, as well as at universities and research centers we can also find design agencies of all sizes that produce and publicize their results on the net: a flow of information and reflection that is laying the foundations of a new design culture and a new set of design tools. On the other hand, this free flow of information could be made more effective through better use of the potential of the Internet (and the peerto-peer and open-source approaches that it has made so popular). In fact, in this peer-to-peer and open-source spirit, different design teams may develop projects and research on the basis of their own resources and opportunities and, at the same time, act as a node within a larger network of similar teams. For instance, global challenges can be launched using an online global platform to stimulate creative people worldwide to send solutions that are discussed and shortlisted for further selection, reselection, and eventual implementation through a process led by the challenge sponsor and/or community members who want to bring the challenge ideas to life.26 This way of doing, in my view, is coherent with an idea of designas-research, applied utilizing the possibilities offered by an online digital platform. The next step could be to use digital platforms of this kind and adopt a peer-to-peer approach to spark off a design research activity: an open-design research program thanks to which complex, socially relevant topics could be tackled and explicit, discussable, transferrable, and accumulable knowledge could be produced (such as scenarios, solutions, tools, and methods offered as contributions to larger co-design processes). Networks like these could operate in a very flexible way, as distributed systems, in which several interconnected design teams function as a large agency (while remaining sensitive to particular local cultural, social, and economic conditions). Given this particular system architecture, they could offer the unique possibility of integrating local and global points of view, and promoting open-design programs in which a variety of projects converge, tackling complex problems and generating scenarios and solutions. As an example of how these open-design research programs might run, we can consider DESIS Network and, in particular, its Thematic Clusters: clusters of teams working on similar topics in a similar way. More precisely, what DESIS Network does is offer a free-choice platform that can help different design teams (the DESIS Labs) to align ongoing activities, create arenas for discussing their projects, and compare tools and results, as well as a place where new joint initiatives can be started (example 3.5). ## Design schools as agent of change Design schools, with their PhDs and doctoral programs, of course, but also with the tremendous potential of all their students' enthusiasm and their teachers' experience, could be very meaningful nodes in these design research networks, and in the resulting open programs. At the same time the existence and viability of these networks and programs are the conditions that can make this possibility real. In fact, without them the potentialities ## Example 3.5 ## DESIS Thematic Clusters DESIS (Design for Social Innovation and Sustainability) is a network of several (more than 40, as of spring 2014) autonomous but interconnected design labs: groups of academics, researchers, and students who orient their design and research activities toward social innovation. These labs operate at a local scale with local partners, and, in collaboration with other labs, they actively participate in large-scale projects and programs. One of the main DESIS initiatives is its Thematic Clusters. DESIS Thematic Clusters are groups of design teams, based on different DESIS labs, working on similar topics in a similar way. Their aim is to build arenas for discussing ongoing projects and comparing tools and results, and to provide a place where new joint initiatives can be started: to create focused design research environments where specific design knowledge is produced and accumulated, where—in relation to a given design theme—a common language is built, a set of conceptual and practical tools created, and scenarios and solutions developed. They emerge from ongoing activities, thanks to the initiative of the design teams who, recognizing their common or converging interests, freely decide to align ongoing activities, establish a coordinated program of events, and, when possible, initiate future joint activities.² of design schools would most probably remain only potential. Or better, the energy and capabilities that schools express would be wasted. However, if they use well the network possibilities, design schools become a real social resource.2⁸ They can generate original ideas and interact with local communities to trigger new initiatives or support ongoing ones while adopting a design research approach (as a matter of fact, it is not by chance that in many of the proposed examples, design schools played an important role in promoting and sustaining them, and reflecting on them in order to generate new design knowledge). While doing this, design schools may work as independent design research agencies, meaning design agencies that can operate with a high degree of freedom: the freedom to decide with whom to work (i.e., with which communities, associations, companies, and institutions) and which kind of project to develop (i.e., where and how to improve the enabling ecosystems). And, most importantly, they can do so feeding the open-design research program, and more general social conversations, with precious unconventional, critical, alternative views.29 Part 2 Collaborative People