## 6 Making Things Visible and Tangible The field of possibility within which people define their life projects is determined by the context in which they find themselves: by the characteristics of what we have called their enabling ecosystem. How can expert design contribute to making this ecosystem one in which active, collaborative, sustainable behavior is more probable? The first answer to this question does not deal directly with how to change the state of things. It concerns how to make it visible. The possibility of steering one's life project toward ways of being and doing other than those dominant, and to opt for active, collaborative behavior, depends first and foremost on what one is able to see from one's own vantage point: how one interprets the state of things and what opportunities one recognizes. So the first stage of our journey starts here: how can we make sense of the complexity of the present and the dynamics that stir it? How can we make viewpoints and wishes explicit? How can we imagine what doesn't exist but could? In short: how can we feed social conversation about the future? ## Mapping and amplifying The question of designing for visibility is a broad one, ranging from catalogs and instruction manuals to maps and infographic systems. In our case, given that we are dealing with complex problems and equally complex solutions, the issue of making them more accessible is certainly a crucial one. We can move from the mapping of prominent features and the physical and social resources in a given area to the mapping of highly complex social-technical phenomena. "By rearranging numeric data, reinterpreting qualitative information, locating information geographically, and building visual taxonomies, we can develop a diagrammatic visualization—a sort of graphic shortcut to describe and unveil the hidden connections of complex systems. Our visualizations are open, inclusive, and preserve multiple interpretations of complex phenomena."¹ This is how DensityDesign, one of the research labs in the Design Department of the Politecnico di Milano, presents its work. In the same direction, the philosophic and practical work that Bruno Latour and others² are carrying out around the issue of representation appears noteworthy. No need to say that what expert design can do on this theme is a central topic from many points of view: for discussing democracy and complex societies, as Latour does, but also, and more specifically, to give people tools to orient their own life projects. Here we shall consider another family of visualizations that is more directly linked to design for social innovation. They are widely differing cases but with a common denominator: in them the visualization process is also, and directly, a tool for community building. ## Mapping and place making First I would like to draw attention to the Green Map System: a nonprofit organization which, since 1995, has been using local mapmaking as a means to promote inclusive participation in sustainable community development (example 6.1) Twenty years of experience indicate that this kind of mapmaking, both the resulting Green Maps and the process of making them, has effects that go far beyond the strict function of a map (even though they are important from this point of view too): "we support locally-led Green Map projects as they create perspective-changing community 'portraits' which act as comprehensive inventories for decision-making and as practical guides for residents and tourists."³ The making of these community portraits strengthens local-global sustainability networks, expanding the demand for healthier greener options and helping successful initiatives replicate and spread. What makes this case so interesting, both in general and for our present discussion, is not only that this participatory mapping process leads to a clear and effective vision of sustainability-related issues in a city or region, but also that, having created a kit that enables these maps to be created in open source and by nonexperts, it transforms the mapping into community building and therefore into a place-making process: a process that produces a new (or renewed) sense of place by connecting a space with the communities that inhabit it. "Many kinds of community mapping projects, when they are based on inclusive and creative learning processes and diverse partnerships between community, institutions and the private sector, can effectively bridge learning to planning, and space to place."⁴ (I will come back to this point in chapter 10.) ## Example 6.1 ## GREEN MAP SYSTEM, WORLDWIDE Green Maps are locally created environmentally themed maps which use a universal symbol set, adaptable mapmaking resources, and an interactive mapping platform provided by the nonprofit Green Map System. Based on the principles of cartography, a Green Map plots the locations of a community's natural, cultural, and sustainable resources such as recycling centers, heritage sites, community gardens, and socially conscious businesses, along with such hazards as toxic waste sites. This movement started in New York City in 1995 and has since spread to over 885 cities, towns, and villages in 65 countries. Its general aim is "to connect the booming ‘go local,'green development and ecotourism movements, empowering widespread participation in critical local environment, climate and equity issues worldwide."⁵ Each Green Map is a local project, created by people who live or work in the community. Each is independently managed, and all the involved groups share experiences to benefit others. All projects receive help from GreenMap.org's continually expanding Tool Center, other members of the Green Map network, and the global office. In 2009, the Open Green Map was launched. Now used in 40 countries, this mapmaking website is based on open-source and familiar mapping technologies like Google Maps. The Open Green Map aims at creating “an interactive space for everyone to share their insights, images and impacts about local green sites of all kinds." ## Amplifying and dynamizing A second way to use visualization as a social organization tool is what we might call weak signal amplification. This process highlights little-known cases, with their characteristics and results and their underlying values, which may then feed the wider conversation on socially recognized values. To all intents and purposes, this too is a design intervention, and not only because it calls for the designing of communicative artifacts to make initiatives visible that would otherwise remain hidden. It is a design intervention also because a design choice underlies the decision of which cases to highlight: that of choosing the criteria by which to look at social dynamics, and on the basis of which to "extract" the promising cases. This design activity, like many others, does not in itself need to be conducted by design experts: gathering these initiatives together, making them more accessible, and putting them forward as "promising cases" is an activity that can be done by any curious, attentive person who wishes to do so. However, expert design can play an important role in making this operation of amplifying weak signals more effective and more capable of sparking social conversation. This can be done through relatively simple actions like preparing formats for presenting cases to be collected in dedicated archives. However, it can also be the result of more complex design initiatives, which connect the design of specific communicative artifacts (websites, films, exhibitions, festivals) with the organization of occasions for exchange and co-creation (workshops, seminars, courses) in which these promising cases can stimulate and suggest directions for new initiatives. One example of this kind of approach is the DESIS Showcase. The aim of this project is to collect social innovation design initiatives from design schools across the globe in a dedicated repository, and to organize special events in which they can be shown and discussed.' Another, more complex activity, which gives a clearer idea of how amplifying weak signals may become a strategic move for promoting new initiatives, is Amplifying Creative Communities (example 6.2). Eduardo Staszowski and Lara Penin, coordinators of the project, write: "Innovative grassroots practices are often below the radar of the general public and need to be acknowledged and sometimes 'normalized' to be ## Example 6.2 ## AMPLIFYING CREATIVE COMMUNITIES, NEW YORK CITY The project Amplifying Creative Communities in New York City takes a localized approach to new ideas that can make the transition to more sustainable cities. It is led by Parsons DESIS Lab at Parsons The New School for Design, in partnership with Green Map System, the Lower East Side Ecology Center, and the design firm IDEO. The project has been funded by the Rockefeller Foundation's NYC Cultural Innovation Fund 2009. Its starting premise is that sustainable social innovation is present in less evident forms, in small self-organized groups that seek to improve their lives and environment through collaboration. The project offers insight on how designers and planners can stimulate sustainable and socially innovative solutions to urban everyday problems. In practice, the project proposes an amplification method to improve and expand the capacity of neighborhoods to identify, design, and diffuse social innovations at a local level, to amplify them to larger audiences. The amplifications are articulated around three main actions: (1) mapping of diffuse sustainable social innovations; (2) designing scenarios to promote synergies around shared visions and toolkits to stimulate the startup of new initiatives; and (3) communicating sustainable social innovations through (a) exhibitions, (b) workshops, and (c) websites to stimulate strategic conversations, create awareness, and promote change within communities.⁸ accepted as valid and desirable. In order to achieve this goal the project aims at defining and experimenting with a so called amplification method."9 Different design strategies have been employed, such as an interactive exhibition of innovative practices in the local area under study: "the exhibition ... more than a space for showing final results is a research tool and a method of interaction with local communities where mapping and designing activities can also take place and the content can change before, during and after the exhibit."10 ## Creating stories One tool that enables us to deal with difficult topics, putting together what is there now and what we would like it to be, is storytelling: “a specific structure of narrative with a specific style and set of characters and which includes a sense of completeness. Through this sharing of experience we use stories to pass on accumulated wisdom, beliefs, and values."11 Storytelling is an age-old activity, but today it is acquiring a rather special importance. It enables us to communicate the complex ideas and values that today's co-designing processes must often deal with. It is also true that the new media have made it easier to produce content and therefore have greatly increased the number of people who have become more or less able storytellers.¹² At the same time, precisely because of this increased capacity to tell stories, the space for action in this field has also grown for design experts. By this I mean that design experts can support storytelling both technically, by integrating it with professional skills, and culturally, by proposing socially and environmentally sensitive contents. At the same time, they also help those engaged in social innovation to recognize the value of this tool and try out new ways of using it. ## Reconstructing local identities One example of this type of initiative is the project Imagine Milan promoted and developed by Imagis, a research group in the Design Department of the Politecnico di Milano in collaboration with Milan's city council (example 6.3). Imagine Milan is an important initiative whose aim is to reconstruct the identity of some of the city's neighborhoods from the bottom up. An important part of the work was the creation of a series of short videos in which local citizens told stories about their neighborhood. By talking about what it used to be like, what it is like now, and what it could be like, they provided a vision of the city that is at once rich, multifaceted, ## Example 6.3 ## URBAN STORYTELLING, MILAN Imagine Milan is a didactic and research program started in 2009 at the Design Department of the Politecnico di Milano by Imagis research group. Its original aim, in collaboration with the Milan city council, was to experiment with the use of visual communication in processes of urban transformation. One specific project was to conceive and enhance a communication strategy based on 20 short videos related to 20 city zones. The background idea was that "the identity of an area is built from the personal and collective histories of its inhabitants, a set of polyphonic images, faces, voices, gestures and characters in a continuous juxtaposition (sometimes, stressful and conflictual) of historical memory, present complexity and future expectations."13 These videos are instruments for dialogue among citizens, decision makers involved in the design of infrastructure, and, above all, promoters of a new idea of Milan as a sustainable city. Different audiovisual formats and genres have been produced to achieve different communication goals: in particular, brief documentaries using footage, iconographic repertories, and interviews to present people's individual stories and record transformations in progress and the good practices already being applied; and video scenarios for envisioning how the city would look if certain behaviors were to be supported and become common practice. Since 2009 the Imagine Milan program has been evolving, and it is now experimenting with the integration of transmedia narratives and social media advocacy. and profound. This experience, like many others, shows how storytelling, especially video storytelling, can contribute to the rebuilding of relationships between people and the space they live in, and thus rebuilding the idea of place. ## Digital storytelling Another example of using video storytelling with reference to a local community is Life Stories, a series of videos created by Mobile for Development (a section of the association of mobile operators worldwide, GSMA).14 On the Life Stories website there is a vast catalog of stories about how specific, concrete problems have been solved, using mobile technologies, in communities described as underserviced.15 Together, these stories give a positive vision of how these technologies (especially the mobile phone) can help to solve problems, especially in difficult situations. Obviously the actual social and cultural implications of each of the solutions require verification, but the communicative effectiveness of the storytelling is immediately evident. Using this technique makes the solutions proposed far more understandable and attractive than they would have been if presented in another way. This effectiveness is easily verifiable for a global public interested, in this case, in the potentialities of Mobile for Development. The same is not necessarily true for the local people, meaning those more directly concerned with the problems and their possible solutions. This is not only because the videos are in English, but also because they have been shot with a style and rhetoric typical of professional filmmakers from outside the local communities. Would it be possible to tell stories in the first person produced by people directly concerned, using the new media but adapting them to the specifics of their local culture? Experimentation in this field means, in cases like these, verifying the possibility of moving directly from the oral storytelling tradition (still alive in these societies) to a contemporary way of telling stories, capable of dealing with the various issues involved in the transformations under way, and supported by the new media (which can be seen as a kind of cultural leapfrogging).16 An example of this kind of experimentation can be seen in the Story-Bank project conducted in India. This was led by David Frohlich at the Digital World Research Centre, in partnership with a number of other UK universities and an Indian NGO called Voices.¹ The aim of this initiative was to verify whether and how the new media might be able “to support non-textual information sharing." More precisely, the project team said, "we wanted to see whether a cameraphone application could feasibly be used without text to create audiovisual stories for sharing on a community display" (example 6.4).18 The results of the project showed that “the system was usable by a cross section of the community and valued for its ability to express a mixture of development and community information in an accessible form." The research team members concluded: "this only scratches the surface of what might be done through more complex forms of story creation and distribution over a wider area network." With reference to another project with similar aims and talking about how much is still to be done in this field,19 Mugendi M'Rithaa, professor of design at the Cape Peninsula University in Cape Town, said: “I have to admit so far we have been driven by passion and zeal, rather than by knowledge. Now the next step will be to say: we have a good story, but we need some technical inputs to make that storytelling effective."20 ## Example 6.4 ## DIGITAL STORYTELLING, BUDIKOTE, INDIA The StoryBank project sought to verify whether and how cameraphones could be used to create and share audiovisual stories within a village community. Stories were created in audiophoto narratives on a mobile phone and shared via a situated display on the balcony of the village ICT center. The project was motivated by the need to support information sharing and economic development in rural India, where literacy rates were low, "to reverse migration to the urban centres. Budikote in south India was chosen because of its ongoing involvement with community radio, its openness to new technology, and proximity to Bangalore as a transport and high tech research hub."²1 The project culminated in a one-month field trial in which free-form audiovisual story creation and sharing took place. In practical terms, 10 customized cameraphones were used and a digital library of stories was created and displayed in the village. There were 137 stories, dealing with a wide variety of topics, created by 79 people (varying in age, gender and occupation).22 ## Hybrid realities The contribution that expert design can bring to making storytelling more effective is not limited to narrative technique alone; it can also act on the cultural sphere. In particular, as the previous examples clearly indicate, the stories told can be very different in kind. Some of them relate real experiences (in practice they are ethnographic observations); others talk about desires or present simulations or prototópes of solutions that may be desirable but do not yet exist. Others again present a hybrid reality,²³ a mix of reality and imagination: "We can take the simulation and prototyping of possible solutions as the opposite pole of a line going from reality as it actually appears, to pictured reality that we reproduce and invent with our creativity and imagination."24 All this obviously raises ethical questions about the sense and role of these narratives, and the hybrid reality they present, in social conversation: "to talk about the role of storytelling in design for social innovation means ... also to look at how one can make use of an idea of storytelling which cannot be accused of being manipulative, and how to avoid it becoming a mere rhetorical instrument."25 Clearly there is no single, definitive solution that guarantees a correct (i.e., nonmanipulative) use of storytelling. There is, however, a move one can make that in my opinion might work to reduce the risks: always make the motivations, the nature of the contents, and the story modes used absolutely clear to the receiver of the message. In a way, it is a question of balancing the emotionally charged, captivating nature of the story with a colder and more rational sense system that it fits into, one that makes the story itself and the content it carries effectively debatable in the social conversation which it is intended to advance or support. One way of doing this is to introduce these stories in the framework of wider scenarios to be seen as designed and built to make conversation richer, more engaging, and more constructive (in other words, with less risk of ambiguity and misunderstanding). ## Scenario building To collaborate with others, people must share a similar vision of what to do and how to do it. So the existence of visions that groups of actors can share (visions of the future in general and of how to deal with specific problems) is one of the elements necessary to ensure a favorable environment for social innovation. However, these visions to do not come out of nothing: they are the result of social conversations that must somehow be able to produce them. An effective way of promoting this process is the building of scenarios. The term scenario is used in various contexts, with different meanings. Here we mean it as a communicative artifact produced to further the social conversation about what to do; in other words, to sustain a more effective process of co-designing. We are therefore talking about a design-orienting scenario: a vision of what things could be like if certain conditions were fulfilled, of what could be achieved and how.26 ## Design-orienting scenarios From this point of view, a scenario is a vision of a world not only different from the present one but also possible and, for some at least, desirable. The feasibility of such a vision is shown by indicating the main steps that would have to be taken to achieve it and the values that would uphold them. This is why a scenario is a useful tool for social conversation: the ideas it presents are actually debatable; they are proposed in such a way as to allow the various interlocutors to say what they like and what they don't, and whether or not they agree on the moves to be made in order to make them real. We should add that, in order to be a truly effective support for social conversation. there should always be more than one scenario, all of which are possible and acceptable, at least in principle and for some (box 6.1). ## Box 6.1 Design-orienting scenarios Design-orienting scenarios are a set of motivated, structured visions that aim to catalyze the energy of the various actors involved in the design process, generate a common vision, and hopefully cause their actions to converge in the same direction. They consist of three fundamental components: a vision, a motivation, and a strategy. These three components constitute the scenario architecture. Vision: this is the most specific component of a scenario. It answers the basic question: "What would the world be like if ... ?," and it does so by telling a story and/or sketching a picture of what things would be like if a set sequence of events were to take place. Motivation: this is the component of the scenario that justifies its existence and confers its meaning. It answers the question: "Why is this scenario meaningful?," and it does so by explaining rationally what we wanted to do in building it, what the premises were, what surrounding conditions have been adopted, and finally how the various alternative propositions will be assessed (i.e., by what criteria and instruments). Strategy: this is the component that adds consistency and viability to the vision. It answers the fundamental question:.“How can we make it happen?" Different scenarios are based on different strategies, meaning the main steps to be done to implement them. In general terms, the usefulness of scenarios in decision making grows with the turbulence of the contest, the complexity of the system operated on, and the number of actors involved (or to be involved). In fact, the greater the number of elements in the system, the more interdependent those elements are and the more uncertain and faster the changes in the context. Thus it becomes more difficult to produce a model, intuitively, of the reality we are referring to and working on. What's more, the greater the number of actors taking part in the decision making/design process (and the more complex the system and the reference context), the more difficult it is to lay the groundwork of shared ideas and values on which that process can effectively take place. When these conditions arise, as is now the case, scenario building not only allows people to overcome the limits of intuition and more simplistic model making, but also puts them in a better position to make an aware choice and argue their options through in the co-design process. In this broad framework, design-orienting scenarios are built to contribute to a specific design process (i.e., in relation to specific problems and their possible solutions). However, they may also serve to create an environment more favorable to the emergence and development of multiple solutions: to feed the social conversation about the future of a local area (a neighborhood, city, or region) or a great social-technical system (such as a health system, educational system, or transport system). In the latter case, which is what concerns us more here, scenario building may take place in a course that is in my opinion very interesting: by presenting a body of existing, promising, yet little known cases in a coherent, reasoned way. To make this proposition more concrete, I will take as an example the scenario-building initiative undertaken in Saint-Étienne, France, in 2008. On this occasion John Thackara had been charged by the Saint-Étienne Cité du Design to coordinate a program called City Eco Lab. The core of this program was a two-week exhibition whose purpose was to show a wider audience some promising cases, both in the city and elsewhere (though pertinent to the city), and give the citizens of Saint-Étienne an opportunity to discuss them and, hopefully, to start new ones themselves. This wider program included a process of scenario building, conceived and coordinated by François Jégou,27 that started from this very general question: "What could more sustainable ways of living be like in Saint-Étienne?" To facilitate a discussion on this topic, a set of scenarios was built using the stories of six families who had been asked to imagine how their lives might look if they participated in different sustainable solutions presented in the exhibition (example 6.5). The result was three scenarios based on a series of short stories that were, as Jégou says, "hybrid realities that are realistic enough to make us question our own lifestyles, but still sufficiently open-ended for us to be able to adapt them to our own lives."28 These City Eco Lab scenario features are typical of this kind of social-innovation-based scenario. They are clusters of stories including a metastory, which presents the overall vision, and several specific stories, presenting specific promising cases. All these stories are highly realistic (in the case of the City Eco Lab Scenarios, this is because the people and places are real, and because the proposed collaborative solutions are really up and running in the same city, or in other places), though they are in fact fictional. By putting different promising cases together and showing them as they could appear in people's daily lives (in this case in the daily lives of some families in Saint-Étienne), they generate a metavision of a possible but as yet ## Example 6.5 ## CITY ECO LAB SCENARIOS, SAINT-ÉTIENNE City Eco Lab was a co-design initiative that aimed to build scenarios of sustainable ways of living in Saint-Étienne, France. This scenario-building activity was part of a larger program in the framework of the International Design Biennale Saint-Étienne, 2010. To create these scenarios, the design team involved six families in the construction of photo stories. They were asked to imagine what their lives might look like if they participated in different collaborative organizations working in the fields of food, mobility, water, and energy consumption, chosen from over 50 projects already functioning, at least in embryonic form, in Saint-Étienne (they involved productive urban gardens; low-energy food storage; communal composting solutions; rediscovery of hidden rivers; neighborhood energy dashboards; demotorized courier services; and a wide variety of software tools to help people share resources). These stories told by Saint-Étienne residents, photographed in their kitchens or in the streets, illustrated three viable scenarios for transition toward a sustainable city: the quick scenario, based on public services offering standard and easy access to sustainable solutions; the slow scenario, based on enabling solutions, allowing nonexperts to improve their performance and achieve a higherquality result; and the coop scenario, based on collaborative networks and mutual assistance. unrealized life: a kind of life that would be possible if all the projects were functioning in the same place and at the same time. In this way, for each scenario the vision (an overview of the existing cases on which the scenario is built), its motivations, and how it can be put it into practice (this can be clearly seen because the cases actually exist) are all proposed at the same time. This kind of scenario seems to be particularly important for social innovation processes. By building on the fact that society is a laboratory of new ways of being and doing, they use selected clusters of existing cases as raw materials from which to realize larger visions. They then return these visions to society in order to promote and support new social innovations. In short, they are both social-innovation-based scenarios and scenarios for social innovation.