# Design for a New Culture (This Is Not a Conclusion) 1. We can imagine three noncatastrophic transitions toward sustainability. The first is one in which people steer their actions in the right direction because there are rules that make them do so. In the second they do so out of choice, with no external imposition. In the third they do so without having to choose, simply because it is natural to everybody to do so. The first transition requires lawmakers and police forces (to create the laws and enforce them). The second requires everybody to be capable of choosing, and to make the right choice (here everyone acts as designers). The third calls for each of us in following our own idea of well-being to act also in the interests of everybody else (which requires a culture that makes it normal to act this way). The reality is, and will continue to be, a mixture of all three. If the first comes to prevail, we shall be moving toward a sad and repressive sustainability. The second, which is what this book is mainly about, suggests a struggle, a transition in which all of us every day, whether we like it or not, will find ourselves up against difficult choices: difficult for us, for society, and for the planet. Expert design can contribute to reducing the struggle by supporting the process of constant co-designing that it entails. The third way is the one that could be lighter, with people following their own idea of well-being and making the right choices for themselves, for society, and for the planet. But does this way exist? Is it realistic to think that it might be possible? 2. The idea that people's individual interests could be “naturally" reconciled with those of society and of the planet may seem utopian. In effect it is, at least in part. However, many societies in the past, among their conventions, beliefs, and taboos, did in fact hold behavioral norms that led individuals to choose to behave coherently in the short- and long-term interests of whole groups. Could something similar be proposed today? Of course, it is not a question of going back to beliefs and taboos like those of the past: today, behavioral changes are the result of free choices. Therefore, a new kind of convention is needed: intentional conventions, which people and communities can (choose to) adopt as background for their everyday life choices, that are also dialogic conventions emerging from a broad social learning process. The learning process that leads to intentional and dialogic conventions certainly cannot be designed as such. However, it can be fed and facilitated. This is what expert design can (and must) do by developing and spreading an appropriate design culture, one that is capable of building scenarios, producing quality, making new ideas of well-being visible and tangible, with which to feed a new diffuse culture. If acquired, such a culture could help everybody to find the convergence between perceived well-being and sustainability, in an easier, lighter way. 3. Therefore, expert design operates on two levels: on the one hand, day by day and issue by issue, it sustains social actors in the constant co-designing process in which we find ourselves. On the other, it works as a cultural operator, collaborating in the creation of the shared images and stories that underlie a new idea of well-being. This book mainly seeks to make a contribution on the first of the two levels. As far as the second is concerned, we are still right at the beginning. For me and for all, there is still much to do ... 2. Ibid.