As professions go, design is relatively young. The practice of design predates professions. In fact, the practice of design—making things to serve a useful goal, making tools—predates the human race. Making tools is one of the attributes that made us human in the first place. Design, in the most generic sense of the word, began over 2.5 million years ago when Homo habilis manufactured the first tools. Human beings were designing well before we began to walk upright. Four hundred thousand years ago, we began to manufacture spears. By forty thousand years ago, we had moved up to specialized tools. Urban design and architecture came along ten thousand years ago in Mesopotamia. Interior architecture and furniture design probably emerged with them. It was another five thousand years before graphic design and typography got their start in Sumeria with the development of cuneiform. After that, things picked up speed. All goods and services are designed. The urge to design—to consider a situation, imagine a better situation, and act to create that improved situation--goes back to our prehuman ancestors. Making tools helped us to become what we are—design helped to make us human. Today, the word "design" means many things. The common factor linking them is service, and designers are engaged in a service profession in which the results of their work meet human needs. Design is first of all a process. The word “design" entered the English language in the 1500s as a verb, with the first written citation of the verb dated to the year 1548. Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary defines the verb “design" as “to conceive and plan out in the mind; to have as a specific purpose; to devise for a specific function or end." Related to these is the act of drawing, with an emphasis on the nature of the drawing as a plan or map, as well as “to draw plans for; to create, fashion, execute or construct according to plan." Half a century later, the word began to be used as a noun, with the first cited use of the noun "design" occurring in 1588. Merriam-Webster's defines the noun as “a particular purpose held in view by an individual or group; deliberate, purposive planning; a mental project or scheme in which means to an end are laid down." Here, too, purpose and planning toward desired outcomes are central. Among these are “a preliminary sketch or outline showing the main features of something to be executed; an underlying scheme that governs functioning, developing or unfolding; a plan or protocol for carrying out or accomplishing something; the arrangement of elements or details in a product or work of art." Today, we design large, complex processes, systems, and services, and we design organizations and structures to produce them. Design has changed considerably since our remote ancestors made the first stone tools. At a highly abstract level, Herbert Simon's definition covers nearly all imaginable instances of design. To design, Simon writes, is to "[devise] courses of action aimed at changing existing situations into preferred ones" (Simon, The Sciences of the Artificial, 2nd ed., MIT Press, 1982, p. 129). Design, properly defined, is the entire process across the full range of domains required for any given outcome. But the design process is always more than a general, abstract way of working. Design takes concrete form in the work of the service professions that meet human needs, a broad range of making and planning disciplines. These include industrial design, graphic design, textile design, furniture design, information design, process design, product design, interaction design, transportation design, educational design, systems design, urban design, design leadership, and design management, as well as architecture, engineering, information technology, and computer science. These fields focus on different subjects and objects. They have distinct traditions, methods, and vocabularies, used and put into practice by distinct and often dissimilar professional groups. Although the traditions dividing these groups are distinct, common boundaries sometimes form a border. Where this happens, they serve as meeting points where common concerns build bridges. Today, ten challenges uniting the design professions form such a set of common concerns. Three performance challenges, four substantive challenges, and three contextual challenges bind the design disciplines and professions together as a common field. The performance challenges arise because all design professions: 1. act on the physical world; 2. address human needs; and 3. generate the built environment. In the past, these common attributes were not sufficient to transcend the boundaries of tradition. Today, objective changes in the larger world give rise to four substantive challenges that are driving convergence in design practice and research. These substantive challenges are: 1. increasingly ambiguous boundaries between artifacts, structure, and process; 2. increasingly large-scale social, economic, and industrial frames; 3. an increasingly complex environment of needs, requirements, and constraints; and 4. information content that often exceeds the value of physical substance. These challenges require new frameworks of theory and research to address contemporary problem areas while solving specific cases and problems. In professional design practice, we often find that solving design problems requires interdisciplinary teams with a transdisciplinary focus. Fifty years ago, a sole practitioner and an assistant or two might have solved most design problems; today, we need groups of people with skills across several disciplines, and the additional skills that enable professionals to work with, listen to, and learn from each other as they solve problems. Three contextual challenges define the nature of many design problems today. While many design problems function at a simpler level, these issues affect many of the major design problems that challenge us, and these challenges also affect simple design problems linked to complex social, mechanical, or technical systems. These issues are: 1. a complex environment in which many projects or products cross the boundaries of several organizations or stakeholder, producer, and user groups; 2. projects or products that must meet the expectations of many organizations, stakeholders, producers, and users; and 3. demands at every level of production, distribution, reception, and control. These ten challenges require a qualitatively different approach to professional design practice than was the case in earlier times. Past environments were simpler. They made simpler demands. Individual experience and personal development were sufficient for depth and substance in professional practice. While experience and development are still necessary, they are no longer sufficient. Most of today's design challenges require analytic and synthetic planning skills that cannot be developed through practice alone. Professional design practice today involves advanced knowledge. This knowledge is not solely a higher level of professional practice. It is also a qualitatively different form of professional practice that emerges in response to the demands of the information society and the knowledge economy to which it gives rise. In a recent essay ("Why Design Education Must Change," Core77, November 26, 2010), Donald Norman challenges the premises and practices of the design profession. In the past, designers operated on the belief that talent and a willingness to jump into problems with both feet gave them an edge in solving problems. Norman writes: In the early days of industrial design, the work was primarily focused upon physical products. Today, however, designers work on organizational structure and social problems, on interaction, service, and experience design. Many problems involve complex social and political issues. As a result, designers have become applied behavioral scientists, but they are woefully undereducated for the task. Designers often fail to understand the complexity of the issues and the depth of knowledge already known. They claim that fresh eyes can produce novel solutions, but then they wonder why these solutions are seldom implemented, or if implemented, why they fail. Fresh eyes can indeed produce insightful results, but the eyes must also be educated and knowledgeable. Designers often lack the requisite understanding. Design schools do not train students about these complex issues, about the interlocking complexities of human and social behavior, about the behavioral sciences, technology, and business. There is little or no training in science, the scientific method, and experimental design. This is not industrial design in the sense of designing products, but industry-related design, design as thought and action for solving problems and imagining new futures. This new MIT Press series of books emphasizes strategic design to create value through innovative products and services, and it emphasizes design as service through rigorous creativity, critical inquiry, and an ethics of respectful design. This rests on a sense of understanding, empathy, and appreciation for people, for nature, and for the world we shape through design. Our goal as editors is to develop a series of vital conversations that help designers and researchers to serve business, industry, and the public sector for positive social and economic outcomes. We will present books that bring a new sense of inquiry to design, helping to shape a more reflective and stable design discipline able to support a stronger profession grounded in empirical research, generative concepts, and the solid theory that gives rise to what W. Edwards Deming described as profound knowledge (Deming, The New Economics for Industry, Government, Education, MIT, Center for Advanced Engineering Study, 1993). For Deming, a physicist, engineer, and designer, profound knowledge comprised systems thinking and the understanding of processes embedded in systems; an understanding of variation and the tools we need to understand variation; a theory of knowledge; and a foundation in human psychology. This is the beginning of “deep design"—the union of deep practice with robust intellectual inquiry. A series on design thinking and theory faces the same challenges that we face as a profession. On one level, design is a general human process that we use to understand and to shape our world. Nevertheless, we cannot address this process or the world in its general, abstract form. Rather, we meet the challenges of design in specific challenges, addressing problems or ideas in a situated context. The challenges we face as designers today are as diverse as the problems clients bring us. We are involved in design for economic anchors, economic continuity, and economic growth. We design for urban needs and rural needs, for social development and creative communities. We are involved with environmental sustainability and economic policy, agriculture, competitive crafts for export, competitive products and brands for microenterprises, developing new products for bottom-of-pyramid markets, and redeveloping old products for mature or wealthy markets. Within the framework of design, we are also challenged to design for extreme situations, for biotech, nanotech, and new materials, and to design for social business, and there are conceptual challenges for worlds that do not yet exist, such as the world beyond the Kurzweil singularity—and for new visions of the world that does exist. The Design Thinking, Design Theory series from the MIT Press will explore these issues and more—meeting them, examining them, and helping designers to address them. Join us is this journey. Ken Friedman Erik Stolterman Editors, Design Thinking, Design Theory Series The story of this book began over ten years ago, in 2004, with a research project funded by the European Commission called EMUDE (Emerging User Demands for Sustainable Solutions). Here for the first time I found myself up against the question of social innovation and started thinking about what design could do to support and foster it. The second crucial moment was in 2006 with another research project, CCSL (Creative Communities for Sustainable Lifestyles), promoted by UNEP (the United Nations Environmental Program) and funded by the Swedish Ministry for Sustainable Development, where I was able to extend my observation of Europe to other areas of the world, gathering noteworthy cases in India, China, Brazil, Kenya, and South Africa. The third important moment was the creation of the DESIS network (Design for Social Innovation and Sustainability) in 2009. This made it possible to set my initial ideas against a far wider range of social and cultural contexts. At the same time, the information gathering and proposition building presented in this book took place by degrees, as I compared my ideas with various projects in the DESIS lab in the Politecnico di Milano and in other universities where I had the opportunity to work: Parsons School in New York; Tongji University in Shanghai; Jiangnan University in Wuxi; University of the Arts, London; and Cape Peninsula University of Technology in Cape Town. So my first heartfelt thanks go to all the professors, teachers, researchers, and students whom I have met in these places and with whom I have had the fortune to collaborate. After this collective thank you, I must mention some people with whom the collaboration has been more intense and with whom my cultural debt is therefore greater: François Jégou, who has been my main interlocutor for many years; he is the person with whom my interest in the themes of this book first began, and whose contribution to the volume itself is the 12 "visual examples" that follow chapter 6. Anna Meroni, with whom I have worked on many activities and research programs, and who today coordinates the DESIS International Network. My colleagues with whom the DESIS network started and who then joined in promoting it: Eduardo Staszowski, Lara Penin, Carla Cipolla, Andrea Mendoza, Mugendi M'Rithaa, Miaosen Gong, Lou Yongqi, Adam Thorpe, Lorraine Gamman, Virginia Tassinari, and Davide Fassi: all of them have been important interlocutors in putting these ideas into focus, and also helping me to put them on paper by supplying examples and to revise critical points. Then there are all the PhD students, now doctors, with whom I have interacted over the years and with whom I have tried to go further into some of the concepts that seemed important to us for the theory and practice of social innovation design. For this kind of contribution, in addition to Carla Cipolla, Andrea Mendoza, and Miaosen Gong, whom I have already mentioned, I must especially thank Francesco Zurlo, Stefano Maffei, Annamaria Fromentini, Teresa Franqueira, Joon Sang Baeck, Fang Zhong, and Eun Ji Cho. Alongside these colleagues whom I have worked with in various ways on the issue of design for social innovation, I would like to thank a small group of friends whom I think of as "traveling companions": Victor Margolin, Chris Ryan, John Thackara, Fumi Masuda, Jogi Panghaal, Josephine Green, and Roberto Verganti. They are people I have met at different moments and whose lives have crossed mine several times on a variety of issues. For this reason they have been fundamental in consolidating, sometimes by contrasting, the ideas that this book presents. Finally, my thanks go to Rachel Coad who, in translating the text into English, has also helped me put my ideas in order, and to Douglas Sery and Matthew Abbate for the MIT Press, whose support has made it possible for all this to be turned into a real book. 1. This book talks about design and social change in a connected world in transition toward sustainability: a world in which everybody constantly has to design and redesign their existence, whether they wish to or not; a world in which many of these projects converge and give rise to wider social changes; a world in which the role of design experts is to feed and support these individual and collective projects—and thus the social changes they may give rise to. In a world in rapid and profound transformation, we are all designers. Here, "all" obviously includes all of us, individuals but also organizations, businesses, public entities, voluntary associations, and cities, regions, and states. In short, the "all" we are talking about includes every subject, whether individual or collective, who in a world in transformation must determine their own identity and their own life project. This means putting their design capability into action: a way of thinking and doing things that entails reflection and strategic sense, that calls us to look at ourselves and our context and decide whether and how to act to improve the state of things. The problem is that although design capability is a widespread human capacity, to be usable it must be cultivated. This does not usually happen, or it happens in an inadequate way. Confronted with this contradiction between a reality that calls for all subjects to be more design-oriented and their difficulty in being so to an adequate extent, design experts can come into play. We are talking about those subjects whose field of interest, of research, and ultimately of work is the practice and culture of design. They can operate as social actors who, thanks to the cultural and operative tools available to them, are able to feed and support the design processes in which all of us, experts and nonexperts, are involved. Of course, for design experts, operating in this way entails distancing themselves from what has long been the figure of “designer." For a century, designers have seen themselves and have been seen as sole incumbents and managers in the design field. Today they find themselves in a world where everybody designs and where, as we have seen, their task tends to be to use their own initiatives to help a variegated array of social actors to design better. This change in role calls them to become something different from what they have been until now. This means that in order to adapt to what is required of them, they must redesign themselves and their way of operating. But then this is what is required of everybody today. 2. The background to the book is the great transition: a process of change in which humanity is beginning to come to terms with the limits of the planet, and which is also leading us to make better use of the connectivity that is available to us: a dual dynamics merging into a single process in which we can already see certain characteristics. Starting with these it is possible to outline a design scenario built on a culture that joins the local with the global (cosmopolitan localism), and a resilient infrastructure capable of requalifying work and bringing production closer to consumption (distributed systems). We are immersed in a process of change that, in nature and time, will not be unlike the passage in Europe from feudal civilization to industrial urban society. In long-term history, this passage was a revolution, an abrupt break with the past that led to a radical transformation of the system— social, economic, and political. However, for those who lived it, the passage was a long period of crises and transformations that were anything but linear, with contrasts between local changes and large-scale systemic metamorphosis, all taking place at different speeds at different cultural, economic, political, and technological levels—with oscillations between political positions and regimes more favorable to the change and others starkly opposed to it. So today, we must expect to be living this turbulence for a long time, in a double world where two realities live together in conflict: the old "limitless" world that does not acknowledge the planet's limits, and another that recognizes these limits and experiments with ways of transforming them into opportunities. Now these worlds look very different. The first is the dominant world, still the reference for many, that shapes the main economic and institutional structures and that draws from its history of success the conviction that its continuity in time is inevitable. The second, on the other hand, looks like a group of islands where people think and act in ways that are different. What the future of this archipelago of new microworlds will be like is as yet too early to tell. It may stay the same for a long time, or it may disappear, submerged by the sea of other unsustainable ways of being and doing things. Or it may reveal itself to be the already visible part of a submerged continent: the new continent of sustainable civilization that will emerge from the transition. This is the panorama of which our lives and our choices are a part. It is also the panorama in which this book is situated: a continent is emerging; what it will be like depends on many factors; some of these depend on choices we have already made, others on what we are doing and will do. It is a transition (long for us, but short for world history) in which we must all learn to live, and live well, on the new islands, and in doing so anticipate what the quality of life will be like on the emerging continent. This panorama is also the space in which the relationship between diffuse design and expert design will go on stage: a relationship that will develop as the two kinds of design work together to solve the many and diverse problems that our societies will have to face. But this will not be the only field on which to collaborate. If what must emerge is a new civilization, the issue is not only one of solving problems; a civilization is also, and primarily, made up of values, of qualities, and, in more general terms, of sense systems. This is therefore what a new civilization needs if it is to come into being. So it is this which design, both diffuse and expert, must collaborate to produce. If it is true that design skills are expressed both in problem solving and in sense making, there is much to do on both these sides, in the prospect of this new civilization. However, it is above all in the second that design must demonstrate its specificity. This is the area where, more than any other discipline, it can bring its most original contribution. 3. The book starts with the local and the everyday: with people in their daily lives, intent on their daily struggle with problems, opportunities, and ultimately the meaning of life. We observe how, more and more often, these people (re)discover the power of collaboration to increase their capabilities, and how this (re)discovery gives rise to new forms of organization (collaborative organization) and new artifacts on which they base enabling solutions. Design experts are an active part of this rediscovery. They are both internal and external agents. They are part of the social change itself, because they must themselves act in unprecedented ways, but they are also promoters of the social change because they collaborate actively in creating conditions that facilitate it. With the meaning that we are attributing to it here, the local dimension is not a question of scale. In a connected world, local experience is influenced in real time by events that may happen anywhere. In short, the local is our interface with the whole world. It is a point of view (the world as we see it from where we are) and a point of action (the action on the world that we are able to perform from where we are). Obviously, what we manage to see or do, and thus also design, depends on the quality of that interface, which is in turn the result of interweaving design activities. The protagonist in our story is therefore a subject immersed in his everyday life, taking part in various conversations; a node in various networks and an actor in various social forms. From his point of observation and action, he designs and co-designs his action on the world operating as a bricoleur: he looks for usable materials around him (products and services, but also ideas and knowledge) and, adapting and reinterpreting them, he uses them to compose his life project. The current novelty, brought by the social and cultural innovation in progress, is that more and more often our protagonist thinks about her life project, or part of it, in a collaborative way. She discovers (or rather rediscovers) the strength in doing things together with other people. So, at the core of this book, we take a look at this innovative phenomenon: a growing number of people have broken and are breaking with routine, and are experimenting with new, more collaborative ways of living and producing. In short, a growing number of people are promoting a new, big wave of social innovation. Recent opinion holds that social innovation should be supported. It is acknowledged that it produces concrete, practical answers to difficult problems, such as those of an aging population, treatment for chronic diseases, the cultural integration of immigrants, and the requalification of cities and the informal settlements surrounding them. However, social innovation is, or could be, much more than this. Often, these ways of living and producing manage to bring individual interest into line with social and environmental interest. For this reason they can be seen as concrete steps toward sustainability: local applications of an idea of well-being based on a new ecology of relationships between people, and between people and their environment. This is an opportunity through which new tendencies have been opening unprecedented possibilities. In the past decade the diffusion of the Internet, mobile phones, and social media, converging with social innovation, has enabled the creation of a new generation of services that not only offer unprecedented solutions to difficult social problems but also challenge our ideas of welfare and the relationship between citizen and state. Parallel to this great convergence, a second is now in the making. The explosive technological innovation under way in the field of fabrication systems, with the miniaturization of productive units, offers the possibility of creating new production and consumption networks: distributed systems. The possible convergence of distributed systems with social innovation could give rise to networks of microenterprise capable of revolutionizing the production system, enhancing the local dimension and redistributing production activities and job opportunities in the opposite direction to what has been dominant in past decades. The possibility of accelerating and directing this double convergence calls for a design research program. Considering that, in the transition, the whole of society should be seen as a huge laboratory of social experiment, the first thing to do is to foster and orient these experiments at all levels and in all application fields. The second is to enhance two lines of action: to replicate the best solutions and to connect them. Experimenting and replicating are two complementary procedures: in the transition, we need to experiment with new solutions and then consolidate and replicate the best ones. Finally, they must be connected so that a multiplicity of small initiatives may make a great impact. Experiment, replicate, connect are three lines of action that call for both diffuse and expert design capacity. Together they should constitute the basic practices of a huge design project: open-design experimenting, able to embrace and align a multiplicity of initiatives throughout the world toward shared objectives. 4. This book seeks to be a contribution to design culture; a contribution to the cultural background that designers, whether expert or nonexpert, should elaborate and use, so as to do better what, in any case, they find themselves and will continue to find themselves doing. On the other hand, since culture is bound to context, as it should be, we can say that it is an Italian contribution to an international conversation. That is, a contribution that starts in a well-defined cultural context. The book crosses various specialist ambits that mingle together in design practice, seeking to elaborate its own point of view and its own language: in short, its own culture. So, although it touches on different disciplinary fields, it is not an interdisciplinary book; it is a contribution to a specific design culture, parallel and complementary to others. This is a culture to whose growth all other social actors may contribute, but it is the design experts who should be its major producers. It is therefore a book for everyone who is interested in digging deeper than usual into the design issues with which we find ourselves currently grappling. For this reason, it tries