OBJECTIVEMETHODRESULTSSTUDY: Ayral, S.; 1994 (France) L'intégration du design dans les stratégies de développement des industries de matériaux polymères ("Design Integration in Plastic Industries")Can design be Regional analysis: Oyonnax managed by the Plastic Valley plastics industryand integrated into polymer development strategies in the building sector?Representative sample of sixteen plastics firms (out of 118)groups—and of the demand in materials of different user industries. Design contribution: in a situation where there are multiple materials to choose from, creating value bysectorAnalysis of the buildingdifferentiating the product to avoid market saturation, and the role of coordination between actors Typology of practices of design management: • Firm with in-house design: design for economy of cost and improvement of product quality.• Firm managing design at top level: design communi- cation power between functions, strategic design mission, creation of concepts. • Firm outsourcing design: design plays subsidiary role in improving profitability of production tool. Building sector: Introduction of polymers uncertainmissing linkages or innovating structures of polymer industrials to create interfaces. Designer and architect well placed to fill this role of innovation and diffusion.To prove the role of design in South YorkshireCorporate design management as an aid for regional development SMEs• Find new uses for recycled glass: glass prototype and ecological composite cement.revitalizing a regional economyArt & Design Research Centre, Sheffield Hallam University case study• Development of an innovation program on gas energy in a mining region that suffers from unemployment. • Conception of a cultural bridge between the heatingindustry and the center of design research. • Center of research becomes coordinator of the project.STUDY: Press, M.; 1995 (Great Britain)From mean design to lean design and a smarter futureFacing theCeramic industry.The British ceramics industry has a weakness con-competitionArts of Tablecerning design: limited investment and lower statusfrom imports:are given to design management.Is design aSurvey:weakness?However, for the firms:Eighty manufacturers,North Staffordshire,· Design judged pertinent.· Design, a process that helps maximize firm efficiency.Thirty-six answers (continues) Table 3.2. Con’t.
OBJECTIVEMETHODRESULTSDo differences in design management entail differencesComplementary interviews by certain firms that manage their design or give design a · Design, a key for success.· Design, a bridge between production and marketing functions.in companies' performances?key roleFirms speak rightly of design but don't recognize the links between design and management.Example: Firms judge that it is important to diffuse designthroughout the organization but only six offer design training.sample): • Design-led (three): employs a design manager, educates in design, foresees employing a designer• Design-managed (six): Design manager, little training.• Unmanaged design (five): Unsure about the role of design, no design manager, no training.Relation between design management and firm performance.Firms that manage design have three times more sales increase than those that don't manage design, and forty times more export sales.Future: the "lean design model":• Reduction of design staff but better managed. Change from design induced by processes to a design induced by creativity. More coordination of design withfunctions. • Exploration of new market opportunities by research based on design. University as partner.STUDY: Ministère de l'Industrie ; 1995 (France) Les PMI françaises et le Design ("Small and Medium Industries and Design in France")Research fromResearch from expertsAbout 1,o0o design consultancies in France: 70 percentexperts andSurvey of 672 Small andestablished 1o years or less.surveyMedium Industrial firmsDesign practice: • One small or medium-sized industrial firm out of(SMIs)3 uses design, but only 16 percent use it regularly.565 questionnaires sent toDesign penetrates more in the domain of consumergoods. Firms that regularly use design are those thatfirms using design or notcreate more new products.• The SMI's use of external design (75 percent),in-house design (35 percent), hybrid (1o percent).• CEO greatly implicated in the product-developmentprocess.• Firms using design regularly charge design costs to (continues) Table 3.2. Con’t.
OBJECTIVEMETHODRESULTS• The average budget per year for design is about 70,000 euros for regular design users (16,000 euros for the others). Perception of design by management:ment comes after less than three years for 65 percent and less than one year for 2o percent. Sales increased on French market and on export (6o percent). Profitability superior for companies regularly using design. Eighty-five percent of the SMIs think design will help them penetrate new markets. • Design, an investment for pleasure: design brings a part of vision and identification and reduces uncertainty.What companies want from the state for design: • Financial aid: (for 7o percent of companies using de- sign) and aids for enrollment of designers (3o percent). • Labels for design schools and definition of the designers' rights in the design/company relationship.STUDY: Walsh, V.; 1995 (Great Britain) The evaluation of designThe commercial impact of the design projectSample of 221 firms among a government assistance program in the U.K.Sample: Mostly small and medium enterprises (SMEs) 5,ooo having benefited from since they were the target of a governmental support program.Government's support for design and funded consul-Types of design projects: product design, 49 percent, product repositioning, 27 percent, graphic or packag ing design, 22 percent, feasibility study, 2 percent.tancy designs Ninety-one interviews• Average investment about $120,000. • Non-merchandise projects, $16,00o. • Projects imply design engineering costs were most130 questionnairesexpensive.Results of projects:• Success in commercialization: 50 percent, partialsuccess, 10 percent.· Generate losses: failure/success, 21 percent, failure,19 percent.About 65 percent of these projects were launched onthe market:• 82 percent graphic design, 57 percent product design,43 percent design engineering projects.• On the 12o merchandised projects for which financial Table 3.2. Con’t.
OBJECTIVEMETHODRESULTSPrice et al.; 1995 (Australia) Design users'view of their design experiences: some Western Australian data Industry attitudesSample of manufacturersThree variables pertinent for multivariate analysis: · Organizational satisfaction with design: positiveLikert scale, 163 answersFactorial analysis: typology of firms in four classes according to the variables studied (experience in design/attitudes facing design). • The engaged 26 percent: satisfied; design is a resource they are going to develop in the future. • The happy 23 percent: design is a valid resource, but won't commit in the future. · The neutral 36 percent: average answers on all factorsSTUDY: Riedel et al.; 1996 (Great Britain)• The undecided 15 percent: improbable future commitment toward designFirst phase of a research project:Investment in design: a market analysis using the MADRID mapAnalyses of the commercialMapping of projects according to two axes:data of 22o design projects• Vertical axis: degree of sensitivity of the market toMarketbetween 1987 and 1990.price and quality.Demands that• Horizontal axis: driven by market volume or niche, creating four quadrants.RewardInvestment In DesignResults: The majority of projects are in the two quadrants corresponding to market quality and niche(MADRID)orientation.• Very few projects in the quadrant that is sensible toprice/mass market.• Most projects are in the quadrant that is sensibleto quality/volume: companies appeal to design tochange their market and product range upwards orto increase their sales.· No firm appeals to design to change the product rangedownwards.Conclusion: Design project = change upwards and (continues) Table 3.2. Con’t.
OBJECTIVEMETHODRESULTSSTUDY: Guimaraes et al.; 1996 (Brazil) Product design and social needs: The case of Northeast BrazilCompanies' Industry of metalrelationship with government innovation experts; Integration of Design in NPDIndustrial sector State of Paraiba, Northeast Brazilinnovation and twelve occasionally. . "Unconscious" design: made by designers trained in an informal manner or by the entrepreneur himself.Questionnaire: thirty SMEs twenty-eight interviews• Design seen like an outside aspect of product, useful when technical problems are solved. • Integration of design in NPD: build on existing practices such as the ability to visualize and the capacity to make roughs and prototypes.STUDY: Paul J.; 1999 (USA)To identify variables In-house study to measure the per- Eastman Kodak,formance of design R&D American firmsBenchmarking on twelveeven though its place in company structure varies. • Implicit value of design. • 75 percent pretest of customer satisfaction/design • 8o percent design as a key for competitive advantage. Table 3.3. Design and Macroeconomic Performance: Design’s Impact on Exports
OBJECTIVEMETHODRESULTSSTUDY: Corfield, K.G.; 1979 (Great Britain) Report on Product Design, National Economic Development CouncilTo analyze the British industry and its perform- ances in terms of product designsuccessful in terms of design "perceived"Better design would have a tendency to improve British economic performance, increase exports, reduce imports, and improve productivity.STUDY: Rothwell et. al; 1983 (Great Britain) Design and the economyTo show effects of design on economyMacroeconomic approach; case studiesPrice is not the only criterion for international competitiveness.To succeed, it is necessary to make good product; selection of critical points in order to integrate design.STUDY: Rothwell & Gardiner; 1984 (Great Britain) The role of design in competitivenessAnalysis of purchase factors for agricultural equip- ment and carsSurvey on 150 British farmers: comparisons of opinions between English and foreign material• Design plays a central role in determining competi- tiveness of exported manufactured products. • Factors such as durability, flexibility, performance, and reliability of use are more important than price. • Integrating design very upstream in NPD entails aComparison of performance between Great Britain and foreign attitudesComparison of performances Leyland and Ford Cortina between 1960 and 1975high degree of feasibility. of two ranges of cars: British · Studies on industrial innovations that are centered on radical innovations are focused on technology and neglect design aspects. • Other omission: these major innovations will be followed by many incremental innovations that will have a more important economic impact than theSTUDY: Unghanwa & Baker; 1989 (Great Britain) The role of design in international competitivenesspetitiveness factors and the role of the design in industrial competitivenesslation of 2,092 firms having received Queen's Award between 1966 and 1985technical sophistication, product performance for use. · The "variables related to design": quality of post-sale service, efficiency of delivery, advertising, and promotion. · The "variables influenced by design": innovation,Impact of design on the British marketRelationship between macro- and microeconomic dimensionsvalue analysis, aesthetics, ergonomics, TQM (Total Quality Management) circles management style, TQM methods attention given to users' needs. Table 3.3. Con’t.
OBJECTIVE STUDY:METHODRESULTSRoy; 199o (Great Britain) Product design and company performance (see also Winning by Design by Walsh et al., Study B) Role of design in Long-term study (seven Design has an influence on price and non-price factors the competitive- years) comparing forty-two in international competition. ness of companies GB firms with nine foreign Commercial success seems based on differences onheatingleaders of the same sector: electronic, office furniture, Comparison of the key factors of successthe importance given to the following variables: • Value rather than price. · Technical performance and design quality. • Marketing: quality of service and brand loyalty Design definition: for 53 percent, aesthetic and appear- ance; 52 percent quality and performance; 49 percent satisfaction of user needs; 42 percent creativity. Design leaders have superior performances in profit and return on investment. Firms that succeed employ designers and have efficient design management: • Multiple sources of ideas. • Innovation by collective decision. • More exhaustive brief in design leaders firmsSTUDY:Commercial impact of designSurvey proposed by researchers of Open University and UMIST (Design Innovation Group) 221 products from firmsMain results: • 90 percent of projects generate a profit. Return on investment in fifteen months. • 48 percent of projects repay the totality of costs in less than one year. • Average cost of projects that succeed: $12o,ooo. • 40 percent of projects generated sales in exports.STUDY: Hetzel & Wissmeier; 1991 (France) L'artiste et l'artisan: une comparaison France /Allemagne des stratégies marketing des entreprises d’habillement ("TheComparison of structures, strategic marketing, andSynthesis of a comparative survey published in Germany more important in Germany. researchers' work in their• Number of firms similar in both countries, but size (Heidenreich, 199o) and the · Germany: considerable development of exports. Firms prepared for international development, whereas Table 3.3. Con’t.
OBJECTIVE in France andMETHODRESULTS• Creation conditions very similar but cultural contextsFrance, lifestyle in Germany. • Germany more attentive to consumer trends—French demand stimulated by creativity. • Creation of German identity by evolutionary continuity and better brand recognition. • Concentration on trends due to strong integration of the sector in Germany.accent on radical change.differ. German designers have a Bauhaus tradition: accent on continuity. French designers have a Beaux-Arts tradition:As for the management vision: • Germany anticipates international market; it is the craftsman who sells very coherent product, long-term visibility, conquest myth, product in a lifestyle: cloth- ing follows consumption. • France has international market: product style isconsumption.strong and educates customer taste; clothing precedes • Product offer comes from haute couture, the artist comes before the market, consumer and manager dream of fashion; passion and seduction myth.Cooper, R.; 1993 (Great Britain) Perceptions of design: a study of the attitudes and perceptions among European buyers of the design of a range of productsAnalysis of the per- ception of British design: ceramic,3oo questionnaires with presentation of productEuropean buyers had some negative attitudes toward the design of British products and were very critical.textile, and small domestic equipment Comparison of purchaser opinionsQuestions on their attitudes in relation to British design compared to best-sellingFor the textile and ceramic sectors, differences of perception concerned design variables like color, decoration, shape, and satisfaction of consumer needs For the domestic equipment, differences existed onin Greeat Britain and in Europe STUDY: Sentence & Clarke; 1997 (Great Britain)categoryThe contribution of design to the British economy Center forEconomic Fore- casting, London Business School Understand theQuestionnaire to 8oo manufacturers• Design and its activities use 3oo,o0o people: 1.2 percent of employment in Great BritainLinks between design activity activities. and economic performance• Designers' incomes: 25 percent on abroad advice • Indirect contribution of design exports: sectors that invest in design that have a positive commercial balance, including aeronautics, mechanics, engineering, and chemical industry. Table 3.4. Design and Business Performance
OBJECTIVEMETHODRESULTSSURVEY: Walsh & Roy; 1983 (Great Britain) Plastics products: good design, innovation, and business successTo compare performance of firms in the same sector in order to put in relation performance and designIn the plastic industry. Two groups: one with eight firms recognized for their effort in design, the other with forty-one companies with no design reputationThe attitude towards innovation of the firms recognized for their effort in design is different from what prevails in the sector. Success explains itself by the fact that design confers more perceived value to products.SURVEY: Kotler & Rath; 1984 (USA) Design: a powerful but neglected strategic toolTo try to under- stand why design is difficult to useAuthors' opinionFour motives are advanced that curtail design implementation: · Managers don't know what design is. · Budgetary constraints. • Power struggles. · Resistance to change behaviors.SURVEY: Borja de Mozota; 1985 (France) Essai sur la fonction du design et son rôle dans la stratégie marketing de l’entrepriseDoes design in- Sample of eleven crease company's profit because of its impact on innova- tion management or innovation marketing?incremental innovation projects in all design disciplines• Design increases companies' profits. In five out of eight projects, the return on investment came after less than eighteen months. Profit comes not only through sales increases or cost reduction but also through cutting back in communications costs. • Design promotes participative management of innovation. • Design does not improve the management control of innovation. • Design improves the management of ideas. • Design improves the company's image, its coherence, and its differentiation from competitors. • Design improves the innovation performance.Roy et al.; 1986 (Great Britain) Design-based innovation in manufacturing industry Principles and practices for successful design and productionTo identify and compare practices and success models of product develop- ment and, conse- quently, to improve the educationalSurveys thirty-seven British Measure of design success: firms and ten foreign sectors: office furniture, domestic heating, computer equipment• Firms having received a design award or having been recognized as strong in design by a design council or competitions and competitors. • Interrelationship between information on the market coming from several sources and product success. Table 3.4. Con’t.
OBJECTIVEMETHODRESULTScreation of new products. • Importance of the influence of competitors' products: profitable to improve their products, but radical innovation not always path to success. • Influence of suppliers on design: 70 percent. • Evaluation of prototypes and models by clients: 57 percent. · Production constraints considered in the design process. • Someone qualified in design to direction committee: 22 percent. Firms that had the best reputation had been created by designers or had some designer in top management position. • Firms with in-house designers have more designSURVEY: Walsh et al.; 1988 (Great Britain)Competitive by design To specify the role of design in industrialQuestionnaire addressed toMany firms disregard design The most effective companies are those that invest inplace in firms that succeed SURVEY:end in itself.To see if there is a link between the attitude and the implication of top managementQuestionnaire addressed to 369 CEOs of British firmsAuthors define seven attitudes toward design: · Table of interrelationship between attitudes towards design and indicative of performance. • Best performances are found when top management encourages design and marketing together, i.e., when design takes into account some market imperatives. Table 3.4. Con’t.
OBJECTIVEMETHODRESULTSSURVEY: Hart et al.; 1989 (Great Britain) Design orientation and market successHow to develop well-designed products and construct a favorable climate for design integrationTwenty exploratory interviews with firms that employ more than 100 people• Avoid overinvestment in design: sixteen firms out of twenty. • Contact with consumers is vital: thirteen out of twenty. · Good design is adaptation to use: sixteen out of twenty. • Good design is cost-conscious: fourteen out of twenty. • Importance of outside appearance (aesthetic): fourteen out of twenty. · Product development by team: sixteen out of twenty.if necessary. • Proactive firms (think they can influence their market): design is used to create the demand and de- sign diversity; unconventional ideas are encouraged. These two groups differ also in design management: · Reactive: lack of data on market, whereas theSURVEY: Roy et al.; 199o (Great Britain) Design and the economy (rewritten report by Rothwell et al., 1983)design in British economy To advise managers who want to utilize• Lessons to be learned: A design approach never ceases; it is at the basis of product evolution. When a product is launched, another should be in the concept phase.design SURVEY: Walsh et al.; 1992 (Great Britain)StudyAWinning by designComparison of forty-one British firmsforeign models:Sectors: Plastic, bicycles, and cars· Return on capital: 8 percent Great Britain, 11 percent foreign.· Rate of profit: 6 percent Great Britain, 7 percent foreign.And eight international model firms· Turnover growth: 15 percent Great Britain, 43 percent foreign. (continues) Table 3.4. Con’t.
OBJECTIVEMETHODRESULTSSURVEY: Svengren, L.; 1995 (Sweden) Industrial design as a strategic resourceIndustrial design Thesis from a managerial perspective To develop a model to demonstrate how design influences strategy; formula-Three case studies of the project Triad Bahco, Braun, Erco, and Ericsson Results:The author defines three design integration processes: • Functional, or design upstream in the product development. • Visual, or the design in the company identity and culture. • Conceptual, or design to question the company mission.Typology of the design-oriented firm: • A vision of how artifacts make life and work better, easier, and more fun. • Empathy to understand user interface.Developing a strategic design cultureHertenstein & Platt ; 1997 (USA)• An aesthetic sensitivity physical objects.• Courage to transform these elements into actions.SURVEY:have an active policy ofForty-three vari- ables were used inincluding:Case studies: eight firms that Selection from forty-three variables to measure design performance.order to measure design performancedesign management,Financial measures most used:Bissell· Turnover, product cost, cost of product development process, and performance of design group.Black & DeckerFirms stress turnover and product cost. What would beIBMbetter would be to stress economic value, added value,Kodakand percentage of sales to faithful customers.SteelcaseThomsonWhirlpoolNonfinancial measures:• Customer satisfaction, innovation, and creativity arethe most used; at least one is used in each firm tomeasure design performance.Firms stress customer satisfaction and time to marketto measure design performance. Designers would alsolike to measure design performance by its impact on Table 3.4. Con’t.
OBJECTIVEMETHODRESULTSSURVEY: Arbonies; 1996 (Spain) Product design and the role of external design consultantsWhat are the key topics of design management in the success ofUse of methodology of the Design Innovation Group for are 14 percent of total budget. questionnaireIn more than 50 percent of the projects, designers' fees • Design importance understood only in the majority ofinnovation? To identify the role of design inRegion: Basque county Survey on twenty-ninebusinesses at the level of product design. • Firms privilege the relationship between design and R&D. • 76 percent of projects were merchandised.strategic changedesign projects and twenty- one firms• Eighteen projects were a commercial success: increase in sales (eight), higher price (five) or higher margin (three), design award (one) costs reduction reduction (one).SURVEY: Gemser & Leenders; 20o1 (the Netherlands) How integrating industrial design in the product development process impacts company performanceQuestionnaire administrated by face-to-face session with senior managementDutch manufacturers home furniture precision instrumentsPerceived contribution of industrial design to product performance: similar perception in both industries, but instrument precision industry anticipated higher increase in demand for design expertise.Comparison of two samples of twenty-three firms, each either investing highly or investing little in designRelationship between investing in ID and company performance correlation strong in precision instruments industry: profit indicators, export sales,turnover. Furniture industry ID intensity not a significant predictor for any performance measure.Validation of hypothesis business performance is positively related to ID intensity, but the impact of design investments on company performance is muchstronger in the instruments branch than in the furniture industry. Effect of the ID intensity on company performanceSURVEY:Are companiesBorja de Mozota; 20o2 (France) Design and competitive edge: A model for design management excellence Thirty-three SMEs fromFirst, the integration process of design was described,excellent in design similar or different in their designfourteen different countries nominated for the European design prize competitionshowing that the reasons for design entry were: product differentiation, launch of a brand, design leadership, and new technology.management? How does design create value in ain 1998 Questionnaire and interviews with topBased on Michael Porter value chain and on literature review, twenty-one variables for design's impact on value were analyzed. A factorial analysis validates three Table 3.4. Con’t.