# DESIGN MANAGEMENT W now,we will look at it from a managerial point of view. Design managementis rooted in the shift from a hierarchical, Taylor model of management we will look at it from a managerial point of view. Design management is rooted in the shift from a hierarchical, Taylor model of management to a flat and flexible organizational model, which encourages individual initiative, independence, and risk taking. Designers feel at ease with the new, more informal model of management. The new model is based on concepts like customer-driven management, project-based management, and total quality management, which all deal with design. This shift in the approach to management has created a demand for in-house design management. It is no longer only a matter of giving a visible form to a particular business or marketing strategy, but of contributing to changing corporate behavior and vision. Thus, the designer’s “defects”—creativity, initiative, attention to detail, concern for the customer—become strengths that managers can deploy deliberately to sustain the management of change. In order to be effective, design must be introduced into an organization in a gradual, responsible, and deliberate way: 1. Gradual. An excellent way to bring the entire company to an understanding of the benefits of design is to integrate design into the organization in stages through a number of successive projects: “Begin with a single project and make it a small-scale success. It will help to sell the idea of working with designers throughout the company” (Bernsen, 1987). 2. Responsible. Even if it begins with a single project, the integration of design requires the support of senior managers to demonstrate the strategic character of design and put to rest the idea that design is difficult to manage. Someone from within the company should be put in charge of making design decisions. ## PROFESSOR ROBERT HAYES ## Harvard Business School “For a company that has achieved ‘world-class’ in all other dimensions, the next challenge is design. . . . Quality design and the many contributions it can make to a global corporation as a facilitator, differentiator, integrator, and communicator is, like most strategic resources, not an event but a process.” As for innovation management, projects in the field of design must be promoted by a “champion.” An individual with a passion for design can make all the difference (Peters, 1989). We need only think of the impact of managers such as Apple’s Steve Jobs, Sony’s Akio Morita, or Robert Blaich, design manager at Philips. 3. Deliberate. Design must be managed on all levels, not only in design programs and design projects. Information about corporate values must be communicated to designers; the design group must be supported across all company divisions; and communication must take place between the design group and top management in the company. ## The Origin of Design Management Design management originated in Great Britain in the 1960s. At the time, the term referred to managing relations between a design agency and its clients. In 1966, Michael Farr observed the advent of a new function: the design manager, whose mission was to ensure the smooth execution of projects and to maintain good communications between the design agency and its clients. As far as he was concerned, the role could be played either by the design agency or by a manager from the client company, since the objective was to keep communication open. It was in Great Britain that awareness of the critical role a designer could play in industry and the economy first dawned (Hetzel, 1993) with the joint efforts of London’s Royal College of Art and the London Business School’s Department of Design Management, headed by Peter Gorb. In the United States in 1975, Bill Hannon and the Massachusetts College of Art founded the Design Management Institute (DMI) in Boston (see Table 4.1). ## The Definition of Design Management EARL POWELL President, The Design Management Institute Boston “DMI sees a future where design management will have ever-increasing importance in four fundamental ways. First, as businesses of all kinds deepen their understanding of the role of design in innovation they will look to design management as a powerful resource for innovations that will effectively differentiate their businesses and build sustainable competitive advantages; secondly, as people continue to find increasing choices in the marketplace and become more determined to improve the quality of their lives, they will demand more of what only the effective management of design can provide—good design; thirdly, the shift in attitude from design management to managing for design will unleash design’s potential; and fourth, the increasingly important role design will play in building a bridge between the fundamental economic and cultural aspects of individual nations and the world will open the door for design to make an important contribution to healthy, balanced societies worldwide.” Table 4.1. Overview of the Design Management Institute (Boston, Massachusetts)