## OPERATIONAL DESIGN MANAGEMENT T confronting design managers and firm managers, and offer tools for effec-tively putting design management into practice. We will look at the practice confronting design managers and firm managers, and offer tools for effectively putting design management into practice. We will look at the practice of design management on three decision-making levels: / The operational level of the project, or the first step toward integrating design / The functional level, or the creation of a design function in the company / The strategic level, or the ability of design to unite and transform the company’s vision PETER PHILLIPS, 2002 Strategy Consultant “The Value You Offer” “My recommendation is for design groups to brainstorm and determine their value in business terms. Designers need to communicate their value in a manner that is both compelling and understandable. “Management includes planning, organizing, coordinating, and controlling resources in such a way to accomplish the mission in the most profitable way possible. Ask yourself: How do I fit in the description? In three directions: / Recognize the business role of design. Solve business problems with visual concepts, interpret the status quo, respond pragmatically. / Establish and maintain mutually valuable relationships. Be proactive, needssensitive, business wise, mutually informed. / Implement efficient work with processes: structured steps, ensured involvement, checkpoints, clear and measurable ratios.” In practice, design management controls three areas: / The administration of design’s added value / The administration of relationships / The administration of processes Its objective is to build credibility and confidence vis-à-vis design in the long term. First, it is important to be aware of those decisions that are made within the company that fall within design’s domain but are the responsibility of people other than designers. PETER GORB AND ANGELA DUMAS, 1987 “It can be argued that a great deal of design activity goes on in organizations that is not called design. It is carried out by individuals who are not called designers and who would not consider themselves as designers. We have called this ‘silent design.’” Once the business context has been investigated, a demand for design is initiated. ## Design and Creating a Business In an entrepreneurial context, such as creating a business or merging multiple businesses into one, it is important to link design with the launch of the business, whether as a means of creating a visual identity or projecting the company’s concept or particular positioning. In the case of a corporate identity, the problem to be solved by the designer is often twofold: to come up with a name for the company and a typography for that new name. LUCENT TECHNOLOGIES (Source Design Management Institute case study) The identity of Lucent Technologies was created despite and because of four paradoxes, according to Patrice Kavanaugh, executive director of Landor Associates. “The first paradox was that this instant ‘start-up’ company became a Fortune 40 company with more than 125 years of experience and \$20 billion in revenues. Nevertheless, despite its heritage, size, and international scope, nobody had heard of this new company because it was, after all, a ‘start-up. “The second paradox was that in order to effectively shape and articulate the new company’s future, its identity needed to leverage, from its own history, powerful brand equities and assets such as Bell Labs. “The third paradox was that the announcement of the new identity, normally a high-profile media event for large corporations, was staged under strict U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) regulations because of the company’s impending initial offering (IPO) of stock. “The fourth paradox was that this was a start-up company operating without a name but with thousands of customers.” Although there is a tendency for “market triggers” to be the events that instigate a demand for design (Bruce, 2002), a demand for design can also be triggered by business strategy and technology. A demand for design stems from a need to differentiate a product, launch a brand, develop design leadership, and, finally, from the implementation of new technology (Borja de Mozota, 2000). The initial design demand can be triggered by various business objectives (Table 9.1). One mustn’t believe that an initial design project only exists in a professional context of a small business or simple problem. The Eurotunnel project demonstrates the opposite. The plan for the project was complex because not only did it need to manage the design role in a bicultural context and a project that was technologically complex, but it also had to balance multiple design projects, products, and company logos. ## PETER GORB AND RAYMOND TURNER, 1992 ## Eurotunnel “Before design and corporate identity could be managed at the Eurotunnel—the tunnel linking the U.K. and France under the English Channel—the decisionmaking chain had to be organized and a structure developed that would facilitate the work. In phase one, a structure was set up under four points: advice, action, approval, and information: / Advice. Authoritative design and corporate identity advice was provided by an English-French team of external consultants (Wolff Olins and ADSA), who attended a series of working groups. Business ObjectiveDesign DemandTo start a companyLogoTo be a design leaderGlobal designTo launch a new product or a storeConcept development and NPDTo launch a brandName development and graphic designTo increase market shareWeb and package designTo regain market shareRedesignTo diversify into a new marketProduct design or brand extensionTo improve R&D policyConcept development Table 9.1. The Business Triggers of Design / Action. Working groups were established, each to look after the design management needs of discrete tasks. Their task was to identify design gaps, agree upon design direction, and recommend to the project managers action that should be taken. / Approval. Where additional authority was needed to approve action agreed upon by the working groups, their chairmen had access to one of the two senior management groups, the Corporate Identity and the Design Management Steering groups. These two groups were agents of Eurotunnel’s Management executive and as such were empowered to make top-level decisions. The Design Management group was also empowered to establish new working groups as required, or to dissolve ones when they were no longer needed. This was clearly not the case for the corporate identity group whose work was continuous. / Information. It was necessary for the Board to guide, and to be kept informed about, major design and corporate identity decisions. In some instances the Board approved the significant directions being taken by the two senior management groups. In addition to this formal structure, there was also an informal one resulting from some common memberships in working groups and a free-roving commission which was allowed to the consultants’ advisers.” Once the design demand has been initiated, two decisions must be made: 1. Who will be responsible for design in the company—a “design champion” at the level of general manager who will attend to defining the new design policy? 2. How will project design management tools be delegated within the company? ## Managing a Design Project Is it necessary to rely on an outside designer? How do you select this partner? How do you supervise the relationship between the design firm and the company? These are the questions we will answer in this section. ## Internal Design versus External Design Selecting an outside designer is often the solution in a first project, because the company will always want to minimize risks when developing design for the first time. Despite his lack of experience in design, the design manager can be reassured by putting faith in the reputation of the design firm. Hiring an outside firm or designer guarantees a state-of-the-art creative level and solutions. Externalizing design also facilitates its integration at a higher hierarchical level, more flexibility, supervision by a design board, and more control over project costs. Table 9.2 compares the advantages and disadvantages of the two methods. AdvantagesDisadvantagesIn-house• cost efficiency · accessibility • easier coordination • company retains control • design develops intimate understanding of company• lack of creativity/new ideas • keeping the design team busy, e.g., ongoing development work • losing touch with external developmentsExternal skills/staff• new inspiration • access to specialists' expertise relieves workload • accessibility of additional • options of changing and exploring different options• lack of understanding of company- specific issues • problems of everyday accessibility • problems of coordination with in-house design and/or other departments • potential lack of confidentiality • company needs skills to evaluate the design work • "not-invented-here" syndrome • problems with industrializing the externally developed design • loss of control and continuity in the relationship • credibility gap if design is too far removed from company's own style Table 9.2. Comparing Internal versus External Design (von Stamm, 1993) Other than the “not-invented-here” syndrome, the solution of externalizing design presents many disadvantages; one might then suggest opting for an external designer or design team that is closely associated with an internal team in charge of supervising the added value of design. Furthermore, externalizing is not incompatible with fidelity (Bruce et al., 1994). ## How Do You Select a Partner? Besides the expense, finding a design firm that meets the company’s requirements is the principal barrier in developing a design project (von Stamm, 1993). Many companies don’t know where to begin to look for a suitable design firm. Thus, companies will often seek the recommendation of a third party or a client. The firm’s reputation is key. More and more, the firm will contact the company directly. This makes the selection process easier and assures the company that the design firm is experienced in the field and well-equipped. It is advisable that a company use every resource available in order to find the right designer. Design consultants and directories help in the selection process. The design manager might also have confidence in a particular designer who has been recommended to him or with whom he has worked in the past. The next step is to verify the design firm’s abilities, which can be complicated. If the company is looking for a creative firm, it will be disappointed by firms that emphasize their own methodology, fearing to start the creative process without a contract agreement or full understanding of the design problem being presented. As a result, the company will visit many different firms and listen to the same presentations over and over that give no guarantee of uniqueness or the necessary technological capabilities. Therefore, it is crucial to ask for examples of past collaborations that show the design problem given to the firm, the firm’s approach to the problem, and the final solution. This way, the company will have a better grasp of the design firm’s competency. Before making a final selection, it is advisable to organize a meeting with the design firm at the company’s premises to discuss the project with the potential collaborators. The chemistry between the people on both teams is a good indicator of the success of the collaboration. Finally, there is also the possibility of asking for estimates; such a call can spread the word to other potential applicants, especially for important or prospective projects. The main factor in the firm-client company relationship is whether their visions are compatible. A design firm will often have only a short-term approach and will only see its role as limited to a certain amount of work. The client company, on the other hand, may have a more policy-oriented and ideological view of the design project. LEE WYNN, 2000 Head of industrial design, Human Factors Xerox “Our study of nine companies identifies the different design ideologies on both sides. / Client ideologies: design as cultural (ecological focus), futurist (technological focus), human ware (lifestyle focus), elitist (dictator focus) / Consultant ideologies: design as image differentiation (stylistic focus), as coherence (corporate identity focus), as service (project focus). . . . Industrial design needs to widen its activities to ensure pre-specification involvement and to remain online with client ideology.” The relationship with an outside designer should be viewed as one of apprenticeship. This means the company should hire a manager who can supervise the relationship and make sure the design is well integrated into the company. DESIGN CONTINUUM, 2000 “The most important aspect of the relationship contract is in planning the responsibility, budget, and time commitment for developing the design relationship as an asset.” The same goes for the design firm; the firm must select a contact person to be in charge of the relationship with its client. The client company will keep this person informed of its decisions and actions (for instance, by putting the design firm on information distribution lists). FITCH, 2000 “We recommend that design consultants use ‘relationship managers’ to enhance communications and establish a shared understanding of priorities and goals. From the client perspective, another important strategy involves executives and design principals meeting periodically for candid, closed-door account reviews.” Externalizing is also sometimes a quasi-internalization because an agreement is made with the partner according to a “network management” logic. The company has its own designers but also develops alliances with outside partners to have access to complementary capabilities, or to balance out the workload of internal design services. Today, the demand for design in business is evolving toward more variety. Businesses still need to develop overall design concepts, but also have the need for limited specialized resources such as CAD expertise or designers to assist an internal team, or for prospective design research. ## Managing the Project Budget Financial management revolves around three points: the type of payment, the project budget, and how to evaluate cost effectiveness. Certain companies, lacking confidence in design as a new process that they do not have experience in, choose to ask for the advice of several design firms and, even, their creative solutions while not paying them for their work. By doing so, they deliberately select less competent designers who spend less time on creative problem solving and do a more shallow analysis of the project. One must admit that while this practice—competition between consultancies with no payment agreed upon during the selection process—is common in advertising agencies, it can pollute the design sector, which is working on smaller budgets than advertising agencies. There are many different ways to pay for design services: fixed fees, hourly fees, royalties, and rates that vary according to the complexity of the proposed design problem. The design firm envisions the amount of work involved in a project and defines in a precise manner the conditions of the contract in terms of payment, planning, and the number of proposed visual solutions. To ensure efficacy, the firm can add exclusivity and confidentiality clauses to the contract. Fabrication fees for models are computed separately. Design centers are a good source of judgment on the validity of a budget. ## How Do You Define the Budget and Calculate Costs? In determining the long-term costs of a project, it is important to calculate in the following: / The cost of trust-building between parties, since a successful design policy depends on a long-term compatibility between the client company and the design firm (Bruce & Morris, 1995) / The indirect costs of understanding the client company—knowledge of the working conditions, personalities of directors, and constraints in the company culture. In other words, the costs of becoming familiar with the company are indirect costs of externalization if the firm goes from integrated design to outsourcing. ## Creating the Perfect Design Brief The company has the responsibility of writing up the design brief, which will be kept as a reference for whoever participates in the process from beginning to end. A brief consists of three elements: the project objective, information about the company, and information about the project (Table 9.3). A final section defines the different phases of the project—analysis, creation, and manufacture—and their respective time estimates. The design brief written by the firm is often reiterated in a document issued by the design firm explaining its representation of the problem. The firm draws up a brief in which it explains its vision for the project and lists its analysis of the problem, its plan for the different phases of the project, and any “visuals” to be developed. This back-and-forth over the design brief is essential for the design firm to absorb and prioritize the information outlined in the brief and initiates the relationship. The success of the project depends on these documents and an effective use of visuals as tools for communication during the project. The designer describes his creative process according to the problem presented and the investigations he will make: drawings of the product, observations of the product users, and visual representations of the market. The company will want to discuss with the designer his visualization of the proposed problem (Davenport-Firth, 2000). ## LUNAR DESIGN, 1999 “Associative and brand visual maps provide a bird’s eye view of the target customer’s products and concepts. The metaphor provided by this kind of map is unusually appropriate for successful product design. It provides a comforting road map for the journey into the fuzzy world of aesthetics, features, and brand attributes.” The success of the project depends next on the organization of the project team. Around the project manager, who can come often from the design firm, are gathered the different disciplines or expertise necessary for the project and the eventual support staff, such as model makers and suppliers. Table 9.3. The Design Project Brief