PhasesIssues to analyzeTools1. Strategy formulationIndustry attractiveness"PEST" analysisOpportunities & threats"Porter five forces" modelCompetitive analysisScenariosStrategic groupExternalSegmentationMatrix attractiveness/assetsCompetitive analysisStrategic capacityValue chainKey success factorsBenchmarkingInternalStrengths & weaknessesPortfolio analysisOrganizational objectivesSynthesisSWOT analysisCorporate governanceStakeholders' expectationsMatrix power/interestBusiness ethicsCultureIdentity focalizationMission visionDesign managementstrategic audit2. Strategy selectionBalance betweenPorter generic strategiesgovernance objectives• volume/priceand SWOT analysis• differentiation3. Strategy implementationStrategy development routesVertical integrationDiversificationInternationalization Note: Column 1 of table 11.1 lists the steps that are involved in deciding upon a strategy for the company to follow in order to achieve its aims (column 2). Column 3 lists the tools that are necessary to implement each stage of strategizing, and achieve the company’s goals. ## Design Management as Competitive Analysis Competitive analysis seeks to determine industry attractiveness, measured first by the profitability margin of invested capital and then by key success factors, which every business needs to know and master in order to survive. It takes the form of two successive evaluations and a synthesis of SWOT analysis (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats). ## External Analysis: Opportunities and Threats Analysis of the company’s external environment is conducted on two levels: the environmental opportunities, and threats for the company and design function. To analyze industry attractiveness, design management examines: / The environmental influences that were important in the past and their impact on the future. This “PEST” approach takes into account key political, economic, social, and technological factors. / The national competitive advantage of the market using the “Porter diamond” tool: business strategies, specific conditions, local demand, and mutual stimulation between industries. / The forces that determine the nature of the competitive business environment (the “five forces” Porter model) through barriers to entry, the intensity of the rivalry between present competitors, threats of potential new competitors, the power force of customers and suppliers, and, finally, the threat of substitute products. This analysis ends with constructed scenarios based on identified key influences and factors of change. Planning with scenarios hinges on a plausible representation of what can be envisioned five years ahead. Next, the design manager analyzes the competitive situation of the company: / By determining strategic clusters made by regrouping companies within an industry that have similar strategic characteristics. / By determining the company’s strategic domains of activity. The design manager will question this analysis; the potential input of design is in the way the company perceives its activity. / By determining market segments that have similarities or differences in terms of customers and users. The segmentation criteria are: • Demand criteria: customer type, functions of use, distribution mode, and geographic zone • Supply criteria: type of technology, cost structures, and control of competencies according to the key success factors The design manager finds the best criteria to determine pertinent market segments and the right allocation of resources. Finally, the matrix of attractiveness and assets positions each domain of strategic activity according to the industry attractiveness and competitive assets of the company. ## Internal Analysis of Strengths and Weaknesses An analysis of the strengths and weaknesses in terms of a company’s resources or its strategic capability also has two levels: the strengths and weaknesses of the company and those of the design function in the company. This analysis consists of: / Resources audit that identifies and classifies resources a company can acquire internally and externally in order to support its strategies—physical, human, financial, and intangible—and distinguishes those resources that are unique. / Core competency analysis through an analysis of the value chain: What are the functions underlying the competitive advantage of the company? What are the sources from which these core competencies can be developed? / Benchmarking, which is the strategic capability of a company, is always a relative notion and, therefore, it is useful to conduct a comparative analysis, known as benchmarking. Past analysis and sectorial norms are already a source of information, but it is instructive to compare the company’s capabilities with the best practices implemented in other industries. / Balanced business portfolio, a tool that helps verify the pertinence of the company’s activities portfolio. The company can be divided in a number of ways. Thus, it is necessary to divide the company into a number of homogenous subsets or strategic segments. A strategic segment is a homogenous domain of activity identified by a combination of key success factors specific to this domain and independent of others in which the company is involved. Each strategic segment mobilizes a particular knowledge in which the company has experience and searches for competitive advantage. Once the company’s different domains of activity are divided into strategic segments, it becomes necessary to analyze them along two variables: the company’s competitive position in each of these segments and the value of each segment. The matrix models of strategic segments, like those developed by the consultancy offices BCG, Arthur D. Little, and McKinsey, generate one design strategy per strategic segment. The last step in internal auditing consists of a selection of key success factors that a company must master in order to outdo the competition. This raises a fundamental question for design management: What is the place of design in these key success factors? The most common key success factors are: the company’s position in the marketplace, the company’s position in terms of costs, commercial image and distribution, technical capabilities and control of technology, and profitability and financial power. All of these criteria help define a design strategy. Finally, competitive analysis is summarized according to external and internal SWOT analysis. The SWOT analysis is a basic strategic analysis tool that is perfectly adaptable to design management strategy. It synthesizes the company’s situation in its context and determines the key success factors to consider in design management. ## Design Analysis as an Organizational Goal Strategy formulation does not only depend on the suitable results of the two external and internal analyses; it also depends on the importance of the role played by individuals in procedural strategy. It is important to understand the mixture of influences that determines the goals of a company. ## The Forces Influencing Company Goals The design manager must look at four determining forces: 1. The corporate governance that determines which interests the company should serve and in what ways its goals and priorities should be established. Corporate governance has become more and more complex due to the separation between ownership and management, and the tendency to make companies more and more indebted to stakeholders. 2. The “power/interest matrix,” which distinguishes investors according to the power they hold and the interest they have in company strategy. Even if there is an agreement on general objectives, there are often differences in the expectations of stakeholders, and it is useful to analyze these differences. 3. Business ethics determine the global positioning of a company vis-à-vis its responsibilities to the community. This position can change from a narrow view, in which short-term interest of investors are emphasized, to a larger view, in which the company wants to change society. 4. The cultural context at different levels: national and professional culture. There are many conflicting influential forces on the definition of company goals. ## Company Goals: Mission, Vision, and Identity The company mission is to support its main vocation, its raison d’être. The mission has to be visionary, clarify its strategic intent, and assert its core values. Design participates in developing a vision by issuing concepts that unify company communications and strategic values. This is particularly true when a company changes its business. Example: E-commerce seen not as a new distribution channel, but as a new way to define a company. ## MARK DANZIG Vice president, creative director, BlueLight.com, 2002 “The presence of ‘blue light specials’ in K-Mart stores continued for more than twenty years, from 1965 to 1984. By the late nineties, K-Mart felt the company needed some sort of Web presence to stay in the game. They went for talent and ended with a deal from Soft Bank. Once the deal was done, the management team turned to the question of what to name this new venture. Kmart.com was the obvious choice, but at that time the K-Mart brand had negative associations for many consumers. “Within this sea of poor brand equity, there was a pearl left resting at just about arm’s length. Extensive consumer research showed that despite its absence for almost ten years, people still had fond memories of the Old Blue Light special. It had managed to fix itself in the minds of consumers as something associated with fun, surprise. Thus the name BlueLight.com was born. In addition to leveraging the only good equity available from K-Mart, using the BlueLight name gave the company some latitude about what it could offer: an opportunity to sell items that would not necessarily be found in a K-Mart store. “Developing the logo, we selected a solution by Michael Osborne Design in San Francisco, a simple image with a bulb that was a clear echo of the original blue light. Concurrently, we hired Addwater Design to design the first version of the Web site. One of the most important things we did was to create a unique organizational structure, a staff organization centered on the overall customer experience of the Web site, a path for repositioning the whole brand and stores in 2000.” In this visionary strategic process, design managers develop an increased interest in the cognitive structures and thinking processes of decision-makers. Design input is integrated into the social construction and representation process of strategy formulation. Design managers develop tools for identifying the social “anchoring” of mental representations. They anchor strategy in representations related to figurative elements and existing beliefs (Durand et al., 1996). Strategic design management is about “interactionism.” Through language, design managers are involved in a constructivist approach to reality building. Design is a key process for both generating and diffusing representations, whether abstract or visual. Representations are made visible through a visual identity and the company’s choice of identity focus. The components of an identity are the company’s culture and its three elements: / The symbolic elements: corporate values, myths, rites, and taboos ## NOVO NORDISK A/S DMI case study “Corporate Visual Identity is a tool that asserts Novo Nordisk’s identity worldwide. What we do: / the way we market our products / the way we organize our working environment / the way we communicate should signal: / what we stand for / where we are going / the demands we make on ourselves supported by the Corporate Visual Identity program.” / The company imagery, divided into three elements: the company image, the professional image, and the power chart / The leadership style can vary from narcissistic to possessive, seductive, or wise Focusing a company’s identity is a dynamic process in which all of the aspirations of the employees unite in a common goal that incites their enthusiasm. Design strategy is shaped according to the focus of the company identity: / Focus on the leader. Executives and employees identify themselves with the president’s image, internally and externally. / Focus on business activity. The directors and employees of the company see themselves as professionals, as specialists in a certain industry. This poses a problem when the competitive context necessitates a downsizing of certain activities or the creation of others, or diversification. / Focus on behavior, either bureaucratic, with a focus on clearly defined business actions, often restricted by precise rules that allow for little initiative (administrations or companies in stable industries), or flexible, with a focus on the ability of the directors and employees to adapt quickly to new tasks and occupations. Finally, design management participates in the building of a consistent identity, so the external image is a good indicator of the internal image of the company. ## Design Management Strategic Auditing One last concern is the evaluation of the design department in order to analyze the strengths and weaknesses of the company’s design management, as well as the consistency between the design and business strategies. It is important to assess the effectiveness and coherence of the company’s design decisions (Table 11.2). A design audit strives to integrate design into the strategic formulation process and is organized much like a strategic audit. After a brief that summarizes the company mission, its domains of activity, competitive market, product strategy, and communication strategy, the documents sent out to different public contingencies over the past three years are gathered together. The design audit means comparative analysis of the results of design on product strategy, the information system, and the communication strategy. If the analysis reveals a weak or nonexistent synergy between these three elements, further analysis is conducted. An audit committee is created out of the different department heads (office spaces, facility management, market research, human resources, finance, communications, and design). The committee plans different operations and divides up the work. Actions include meetings with marketing, production, and R&D, meetings with the sales force on points of sale, and visits to all of the company’s retail outlets, factories, and offices. These different meetings and visits allow for gathering the necessary information to make a final assessment, with the help of targeted questionnaires. COHERENCE EVALUATIONIs there a visible unity between the design strategy and the business strategy? Is there a visible coherence between the product, information,PRODUCT STRATEGYand communications strategies? Is there a global design strategy?What is design's role in product strategy?Who oversees the role design plays in new product launch committees or product strategy committees?How are investments divided according to different types of design?What is the ratio of investments in design in the phase of identification of new business opportunities?What are design costs compared to R&D costs?Is there a cost control of components bought externally? What is the ratio of design costs to expenditures on packaging,INFORMATION SYSTEMSlabeling, and paper documents? What role does design play in information systems?(VISUAL IDENTITY) and architecture and those for corporate communications? What is the percentage of design expenditures in different communications techniques?Is there a systematic procedure for observing the competitors' design on retail sites?What kinds of sales materials are given to the sales force, and what istheir value in terms of how the information is designed? What role does information design play in internalcommunications? coMMUNICATION sTRATEGY What is the relationship between expenditures on graphic design Table 11.2. Design Management Strategic Audit A design audit this complete is rare, but a partial audit can be conducted, such as an audit of design management practices, including inventory of working procedures with outside design firms, procedures for selecting designers, and project management using a standard contract, evaluation sheet, and balance sheet. This sometimes leads to benchmarking, or a comparison of design management’s best practices. The majority of companies adopt the “acquired” strategic design management model through successive levels of apprenticeship and experience curves (Borja de Mozota, 2001). The design strategy will vary depending on the type of business: / One where design always plays a strategic role, often because of the will of the founder / One where design plays a progressively more strategic role. Y O KAMINAGAI, 2002 Design manager, RATP (Paris metro and bus service) “The life of the design entity called today ‘Unity Design Management’ was until now determined by its adaptability to the firm’s strategic positions. “In the beginning, design management was rather in the hands of marketing. At the time of the big-bang management change of RATP in 1990, conducted by Christian Blanc, a first unit of ‘design and spaces’ was born, which did not last more than eighteen months because of the confusion about the word ‘design’ used in a cosmetic sense and the launch of RATP’s new identity. For three years design management activity was assigned to a team called ‘Transport Spaces,’ a title that describes the objective: spaces. “When in 1995 a direction for project management was initiated, the first design management unit was created simultaneously. This unit was called ‘Design and Standards’; it was responsible for the architectural program or project management activities that were more technical and functional. Since October, 2001, the design unit has migrated up to the users services direction and is now finally called ‘Design Management.’ “In other words, adaptability in design management is necessary not only so it can survive but so it can develop.” ## Make the Strategy Visible One of design’s jobs is to make the business strategy visible. A design strategy is based on a global image of all aspects of the company in terms of its communications, products, and locations. This is organized around two objectives. ## The Objective of Coherence Managing the visual system of the company (communications, buildings, and products) entails an effective and consistent use of design by every decision maker in the company. But the obligation toward consistency does not imply being boring; it is important to define design standards for the company, to inform about and apply them, but also to accept digressions from the norm in order to generate variation. The design management system must manage the overseeing of coherence on three levels: consistency between the elements in the visual system, consistency of the visual system and the business strategy, and consistency of the visual system with design positioning. ## The Definition of a Design Standard To define the company’s design “standard,” or its philosophy in regards to design, means specifying: / Design’s place in the key success factors in each strategic business unit. / The design department’s responsibility in front of other departments in the company. In other words, it is important to clarify the driving role given to designers in front of the other creative forces in the company, particularly corporate communications, R&D department, and the committee on new product development. The extent of design’s responsibility as a key success factor for building a competitive advantage is determined by the extent of its influence on innovation, information, and communications strategies. This determines the resources allocated to design, the design positioning of the company, and the selection of the design-mix. ## Choosing a Design Strategy By definition, “design strategy ” is a plan that helps diffuse design throughout the company. ## The Designer-Entrepreneur Model Many companies conform to the designer-entrepreneur model, as in fashion design, retail, and furniture design. This list is not exhaustive. This model is becoming more and more common in textile, luxury items, jewelry, and decoration, because creation automatically plays a strategic role, but there are also designerentrepreneurs in other industries. The story of James Dyson and the vacuum cleaner is a good example. ## JAMES DYSON, UNITED KINGDOM “One day when James Dyson was vacuuming, he realized that the bag vacuum cleaner he was using had stopped working. Thinking the bag was full, he changed it. But again after a short period of time the cleaner lost suction. He had seen a cyclone cleaning air in sawmills, and adapting the idea, he began developing his product. “He strongly believed the idea would work because there was no choice for the consumer. His early experiments were not entirely successful, but he applied for a patent in 1980 for a vacuum cleaning appliance using cyclone technology. It took another four years and 5,127 prototypes, but even having proved the technology, he found little interest on the part of the existing vacuum cleaner industry. “Eventually, Dyson began the hard work of raising funds to start his own business and it gradually paid off. Launched in 1993—fourteen years after the initial idea—Dyson employs 1,800 staff, producing around 10,000 cleaners every day in its factory in Wiltshire. The Dyson empire is worth £530 million and has a number of product variants in its vacuum cleaner range.” (Bruce & Bessant, 2002) The design-entrepreneur strategy is “innate” to the founder’s idea and close to the business strategy. For a design strategy and “constructed” competitive design advantage we will look at three strategies based on those of Michael Porter—three generic design strategies with three different aesthetic positionings in an industry (Table 11.3). These strategies express the relationship between strategy from the point of view of top level management and the strategies of different operational activities— between vision and implementation. Every strategy privileges one of the three “form dimensions”: the cost-driven strategy privileges the structural dimension; the image-driven strategy, the symbolic dimension; and the market-driven strategy, the functional dimension. In sum, choosing a design strategy means choosing an aesthetic positioning that will be the expression of the company’s approach to design. That choice will determine the position that design has in the company structure. ## The Cost-Driven Strategy This is convenient for companies that give priority in their competitive advantage to advanced technology. This technology-driven development creates a design position that is close to R&D, qualified by design policies driven by product design, and supported by user-interface and environmental design (particularly for production units). The objective assigned to designers is to innovate and lower production costs in order to maintain technological leadership, which includes working on fabrication processes, technical documentation of products, and production architecture. Cost-driven design strategyImage-driven design strategyMarket-driven design strategyStrategy dominated by costsStrategy of differentiationStrategy of concentrationDesign's role is to improve productivityDesign's role is to reinforce the company's market share through the quality of its image and brandsDesign's role is to help position the company as a specialist that appeals to a certain kind of userThe company's aesthetic positioning favors the structural (or technical) dimension of the corporate design systemThe company's aesthetic positioning favors the semantic dimension of the corporate design systemThe company's aesthetic positioning favors the functional dimension of the corporate design system Table 11.3. Design Strategies According to Porter Generic Strategies ## The Design Differentiation Strategy This concerns enterprises that base their competitive advantage on the power of their marketing and the quality of image. The important aspects of this strategy are the positioning of company brands and their market shares. The design strategy must reinforce chosen market positionings and contribute to reformulating them in the competitive environment in order to maintain leadership in terms of image. This development through marketing leads to: / A differential aesthetic positioning that emphasizes the symbolic dimension of the product and its communicative impact / A design position close to marketing, publicity, and communications departments / A design strategy that insists on brand equity across all design disciplines and customer-oriented value creation ## YO KAMINAGAI ## Design manager, RATP “The objective of RATP is to give a maximum of possibilities so that every user can have a positive sensory experience. The design-oriented approach has allowed the building of a progressive response fitted to different process and project levels: / to consolidate the design management unit by infusing design into every project—transportation, information, space, repairs, modernization—by striving to minimize bad surprises for customers. / to enrich its service with more functions, pleasures, and emotions through cultural actions. ‘Tactical’ introduction of good surprises enriches basic transportation service. / finally, to have the opportunity to manage large development projects RATP created and to bring to life new models of service. These ambitious realiza tions, though limited in number, bring hope to the public in proving the strategic intent of the company.” There are also hybrid design strategies that rely on both cost advantage and differentiation. ## The Market-Driven Strategy This concerns companies that specialize in one segment or use a strategy of concentration. Their competitive advantage is guaranteed by their leadership in understanding a particular market or a certain type of user. Design must then reinforce this leadership in finding improvements and differences in the functional dimensions of the product, adapting to its uses but also anticipating new uses. This development leads to: / A differential aesthetic positioning that emphasizes the functional dimension of design: use, user interface, and user experience / A design positioning between production and marketing / A design strategy that privileges product design and consumer behavior research The cost-driven design strategy concentrates on economies and the reduction of costs in the company system. The other strategies focus on the creation of qualitative value in the company system. Design strategy and its corollary aesthetic positioning offers a direction to design management that must be infused in the decision-making systems of the company: / Across the systems of financial allocation of investments and ratios, budgets affected by design, the definition of design evaluation tools, design performance measurement in terms of the company’s performance / In the communications and training systems, meaning to diffuse design knowledge in the company through a connection with the human resources management department / Through the management of design’s role in information systems ## Select a Design Strategy Development Route As with strategy formulation, the design department participates in the selection of a route for implementing the chosen strategy, then develops design actions that will cohere to that route. The principal development routes are: 1. Upstream and downstream integration 2. Innovation 3. Diversification 4. Internationalization 5. Withdrawal 6. Alliances These different routes can be followed by the progressive acquisition of new knowledge internally through innovation, integration, and internationalization, but also, more and more often, externally through fusion, acquisition, alliance, and withdrawal. Whatever the chosen route, design can anticipate new routes consistent with strategic analysis or play a role in implementation: / By taking the internationalization route; for example, by creating a design center in different countries or assembling a multicultural design team / By conceiving a new offer in the innovation route or diversification phase / By choosing a visual identity in the fusion and acquisition route or by an innovation strategy that develops alliances ## Design Management Strategy Implementation Strategic design management adopts specific methods to diffuse design as a key success factor in the company. ## Strategic Design Management Tools ## Defining a Design-Mix The design-mix is the allocation of design resources and budget amongst the different design departments of the company. It expresses the division of the design budget between different design disciplines according to the design strategy. If the company considers its most important visual components to be its business documents, graphic design will be favored. If the company puts most of its energies into the products, packaging, and product design, or “user design,” interface is put at the forefront. If priority must be given to the shops and workspace, investment in environmental design should be favored. Therefore, the integration of design into the company implies determining a priority every year and establishing a middle-term coherence between these different investments by examining the consistency between the design-mix and the marketing-mix, or the design-mix and investments in corporate communications. In participating in strategic analysis, the design manager defines the goals toward which the design department works, then selects design investments and the budgets necessary for the programs. The efficiency of budget allocation comes from the trust given to design and the coordination between the design budget and that of the other departments in the company. ## Controlling Design Performance Controlling design performance and its efficiency depends on the tools used to evaluate strategic objectives, such as the return on investment of design and its impact on company performance. Strategic design management implies financial auditing. This necessitates that design management work with the financial department to help designers insert their work into company management ratios. The integration of the design function implies the establishment of criteria to measure the strategic value of design. For example, measuring the impact of design on company vision, the creation of a market, and the value chain of the industry, or measuring design’s influence on the stock market value of the company. Control should not be limited to the final results; it must take into account the degree of design diffusion in the company. It must measure the impact of design policies in every department of the company and on every decision-making level, and find the points of entry for design issues in human resources management procedures and competencies. ## Human Resources Design Management Design is an instigator of behavioral and mental change. The design department can aid the human resources department and internal communications in: / Creating and maintaining internal and external information networks and establishing places for information exchange. / Building long-term relationships externally and internally, particularly through building relationships with design schools, enacting recruitment favorable to design diffusion, and valorizing of the “creative” profiles of collaborators in their careers. / Identifying the reciprocal expectations of the collaborator, customer, and designer. Design can facilitate new expectations of personnel in terms of autonomy and individualism. The creation of a climate favorable to design cannot be realized without stressing design influence in recruitment decisions or career management decisions—for example, ideas valorized by remuneration. ## Design Management and the Law Design management should constantly rethink and improve every aspect of design protection. Intellectual property rights are intangible rights that have value, and can be transferred and licensed with royalty payment. It is important to recognize these rights and to take the appropriate steps to protect them. Intellectual property rights prevent others from stealing new designs, and they form a framework within which new designs can be exploited to their full potential. Intellectual property rights include copyright, design rights (unregistered and registered), patents, and trademarks. If the design has novel and inventive qualities, obtaining a patent is possible; if the features of the design configuration are novel, they are subject to copyright. If the articles are being sold under a particular trade name or sign, they can be protected by a registered trademark (Bruce & Bessant, 2002). ## Infusing Design in the Organizational Decision-Making System In order for design to be considered a key success factor, it must consider tools for infusing design into the decision-making system. ## Design at Top-Level Management Design is represented at the board of directors by a design director (a position sometimes assumed by a designer-entrepreneur or founder), by the design manager, or by a joint director of quality control and design or communications and design. But the importance of design will also be shared by general management as a whole. ## Structuring the Design Department Large companies with in-house design departments will specify the role of different teams and dedicate some teams to long-term visionary design missions, either externally or internally. ## YO KAMINAGAI Design manager, RATP, 2002 “Methods are concretized by three teams adapted to the company’s strategic evolution: / a product development team that sets procedures in which architecture and design intervene upstream in projects, and a global design plan that translates stable and trend fundamentals, issued from company memory. / an entity in charge of the diffusion of a ‘sensible culture’ in the RATP, whose objective is to transmit a need for design that is assumed by every employee in charge of the travelers’ spaces. / an entity of cultural engineering for a limited series of cultural and artistic projects reporting directly to top management, which steers design activity to be more visible.” The role of design management is, therefore, to create a mind-set that supports design in every department in the company. This is accomplished by: / Defining a design department that evolves alongside strategy building / Creating specific management skills in each department, particularly in accounting and finance, human resources, and quality control ## Infusing Organizational Culture The goal is to align design with the rites of the company, which is done naturally either because the founder is a designer himself, the founder’s legacy and the values he represents, or because the design director has a certain charisma that exceeds the design management department. ## Transforming the Information Systems Design management cannot dissociate itself from the implementation and improvement of information systems in the company on many levels. The choice of computer systems influences design management in innovation and communications management, and in the different stages of managing a new product launch. It is particularly important when design co-opts customer competence (Pralahad & Ramaswamy, 2000). Still other computer choices can be equally useful to design management, such as decisions made in terms of information systems and, in particular, the documents used for communicating the corporate financial and performance results to all stakeholders. Information design helps everyone understand and share strategic decisions, because statistics and figures are organized in the most effective manner. Information design also creates a standard, so that all company documents are consistent and well-designed—not just those documents that are external, but also meeting reports, memos, notes, or internal electronic messages. Data presentation and information design in the company has an impact on decision-making processes. To oversee the consistency of design and company strategy entails the visualization of an information system that is optimized by design. ## Transforming the Company Vision When design is considered a key success factor, it is likely that design management will participate in the strategic diagnosis that aims to transform and anticipate new visions of the company’s business context. ## Selling Design Expertise Firms like Philips began by developing internal design capabilities, design management, and concept design. They also gathered information by surveying fashion and design trends. This knowledge is part of key company resources and becomes a means of penetrating other markets by transforming the design department into a subsidiary that can then work in other market segments. This diversification of the design function can also become a tool for enriching its competitive and technological research and observation. ## Prospective Design Trend Spotting By observing the slight changes in outside world, the designer can forecast how these will affect the environment and the goals of the company. Design management acts as counselor in times of uncertainty, advising the company on where to find innovative areas from which useful information can emerge. Companies that are involved in fluctuating environments put more and more confidence in their designers to formulate new product opportunities and competitive visions. The design department must then organize in order to clearly assert its vision for future products and markets. Design management seeks to: / Delimit space dedicated to creation. For example, set aside a room where prototypes are exhibited and discussed on a regular basis with general management or “premium” compensation policy makers, or have contests for the best design of the month from within the design department, or systematically distribute articles on selected creations and design trends among strategy directors. / Ensure prospective design research for product concepts. The development of product concepts is surely the most effective tool for envisioning the future and gaining reactions from other departments in the company and outside markets. But it is difficult to validate this in the management plan; why mobilize resources on an activity that is not immediately valued by the market? How do you pilot research if it isn’t connected to a project? / Utilize trend spotting, as well as technological research. One of the responsibilities of design management is to be aware of design trends through the research of pertinent sources, and to synthesize this information visually. The company might subscribe to trend books from styling offices. Visual trend mapping helps the company build a representation of its perception of the environment, and to anticipate prospective changes. It also helps define relationships between an object and its context and harmonize its discourse with psycho-sociological trends and values. Hence, the idea to create trend maps for new design-forms. This tool goes beyond communications or concept generation, since it aims to standardize the conceptual process and deduce a prescriptive method for trend spotting and strategic formulation (Bouchard, 1997). This meta-model demonstrates a standard for spotting trends based on the study of: / Specific design skills—for example, user-interface systems / Global design as created by the manufacturers / Design as perceived by consumers / Design as created by suppliers The automobile industry, for example, relies upon trend spotting in design and technology, and, from that, a new vision of strategic design management has emerged. Its objective insists on managing alliances, creating systemic co-conception relationships, and encouraging a change of vision in an industry. ## Strategic Design Management Checklist Strategy: Define a business strategy that incorporates design goals. Define a design strategy. Ensure that the design strategy regroups products, communications, space, and information. Planning: Schedule design projects. Instigate design tests. Define design standards; graphic, product architecture, and structural norms. Structure: Represent design at the top-management level. Create a mind-set favorable to design. Finance: Define design ratios for accountancy and audit. Ensure a budget is available for design strategy implementation. Human Resources: Create a favorable climate for design. Influence recruitment and career management. Information: Communicate the design mission to the company. Utilize trend spotting. Communication: Create design contests. Communicate about product concepts. R&D: Create relationships between design, marketing, and technological trend spotting. Project Management: Supervise key decision phases. Integrate design upstream, at the ideation phase. Branding: Insert design research into strategic marketing. Create prospective brainstorming on brands. Evaluation: Compare design performance with company performance. Verify the coherence of the design system. Table 11.4 summarizes the design manager’s position and the different levels on which design enters into the decision-making system of the company. OPERATIONAL DESIGNFUNCTIONAL DESIGNSTRATEGIC DESIGNStrategy: • Define design policy in the product and commu- nications policies • Define a brand policy and the role design plays in the brandStrategy: • Coordinate design strategy with the marketing, innova- tion, and communications departments • Instill a design strategy into the implementation of the business strategyStrategy: • Define a business strategy that incorporates design goals · Define a design strategy • Ensure that the design strategy regroups products, communications, space, and informationPlanning: • Draft design briefsPlanning: • Define procedures/schedules • Define standards of design performance · Define relationships between design and total qualityPlanning: · Schedule design projects • Launch design tests • Define design standards: graphic, product, and structural normsStructure: • Select designers · Define teams and people who are connected with the designers · Nominate a "design champion"Structure: • Define the role, workspace, and tasks of the design manager in the business structure • Create a matrix model for innovation and projects • Implement an in-house design serviceStructure: • Represent design at the top management level • Create a mind-set that is favorable to designFinances: • Manage design project budgets · Estimate design costsFinances: • List suppliers and collaborating designers • Ensure that the budget is scheduledFinances: • Define the design manage- ment regulations • Ensure that there is a budget for implementing the design strategyHuman Resources: • Define design competenciesHuman Resources: • Create design understanding among the firm partners• Create a climate that is favorable to design • Influence hiring and manage- ment of design careersInformation: · Develop an under- standing of company goals among designers · Draft project documen- tation and controlInformation: • Draft marketing, design, and production plans • Disseminate design know- how in the companyInformation: • Communicate the design mission in the company • Implement trend spottingCommunications: · Form relationships with design schools • Create a graphic chartCommunications: • Manage the relationship between graphic and structural chartsCommunications: • Create design contests • Communicate product conceptsR&D: • Support technology transfersR&D: • Manage relationships with suppliers • Form quality policyR&D: • Create a relationship between design and technological trend spotting Table 11.4. The Design Manager’s Toolbox