# Experimentation and growth: Morris as designer-craftsman, 1875–81 With the reconstitution of Morris & Co. under his sole ownership, William Morris was freed from many restrictions – legal, financial and commercial – and he set out, with his usual vigour, to complete what he had begun in recent years. His endeavours, through elevating the status of the designer and encouraging originality in design, contributed to a revolution in the decorative arts. The Morris look', with its rich colours, simple elegance, naturalistic inspiration and flowing lines, became familiar to the public at large. Within a decade, his designs and products were widely admired throughout the western world. All this required a tremendous amount of hard work, and sound commercial judgement. The immediate priority was to give his customers more choice, inspiring Morris to produce a whole range of sumptuous new designs. In May 1875 he wrote to a friend that he was up to the neck in turning out designs for papers, chintzes and carpets and trying to get the manufacturers to do them'.¹ The years which followed were the most creative of Morris's career in business. Between 1875 and 1885, he made 21 designs for wallpapers, 32 for printed fabrics and 23 for woven fabrics, together with perhaps 24 for machine-made carpets and others for hand-made carpets and rugs, tapestries and embroideries (see Table 6). They mark his emergence as an undisputed master of flat pattern design. His wallpapers, Floud tells us, demonstrate an instinctive mastery of the art of pattern development hardly reached by even the cleverest of his contemporaries, and bear a classic imprint quite lacking in papers which in their day must have seemed much more avant-garde'.² More designs extended the range of products, but there remained the problem of quality in manufacture. Where he could find outside firms capable of meeting his specifications, Morris willingly subcontracted work to them. The new wallpapers, like Morris's early designs, were printed by Jeffrey & Co., and the work was done so carefully and with such anxious desire to satisfy all Mr Morris's requirements that there was no necessity to take them more completely into our hands'.3 Other products too were subcontracted to manufacturers in the trade. In 1875, Morris produced a design for printed linoleum, which was already a very popular cheap floor covering. The material required specialist expertise and factory production methods, and Morris turned to one of the leading manufacturers of floorcloth - probably Nairns of Kirkcaldy, although it is impossible to identify the firm with any certainty.⁴ Morris also turned to the trade for the production of machine-made carpets. The earliest patterns were for Kidderminster carpets. Kidderminsters - also called double or triple cloths - were in effect composed of two or three separate woven fabrics on top of each other, each of a different colour, with its own weft and warp. The different colours might be brought to the surface wherever the design demanded, thus linking the cloths together. Multiple cloth carpets were less durable than pile carpets, but were cheap, and could be very attractive, if the pattern was bold enough to exploit the limited range of colours available. Two- and three-ply Kidderminsters were made for Morris & Co. in Yorkshire by the Heckmondwike Manufacturing Co.⁵ Within the next few years, the range offered by Morris & Co. grew considerably, with the introduction of other types of machine-made carpets. Brussels and Wilton pile carpets were first produced for the firm in or around 1877. (In a Brussels carpet, raised loops are left in the warp, forming a looped pile. If the loops are cut, leaving a free pile, the result is a Wilton.) Wiltons in particular proved very popular; Parry refers to twentyfour different designs, in a variety of colourways.6 The Wilton Royal Carpet Factory Co. was commissioned to produce Real and Patent Axminsters to Morris's designs. These were both woven versions of handmade carpets, which traditionally had not been woven, but knotted or tufted from short lengths of yarn. The essential difference between Real and Patent Axminsters was that the power-looms used for Patent Axminsters produced a coarser fabric. In consequence, Morris's designs were necessarily much bolder than for Wiltons or Real Axminsters, and Patents were Table 6 William Morris designs for wallpapers and fabrics, 1861–96
