# Idealism and action: the early years of Morris, Marshall, Faulkner and Co., 1861–69 Morris, Marshall, Faulkner & Co. (MMF & Co.) was formed on 11 April 1861. The partners were Ford Madox Brown, Edward Burne-Jones, Charles Faulkner, Peter Paul Marshall, William Morris, Dante Gabriel Rossetti and Philip Webb. The reputations of Brown and Rossetti were already well established. Brown, the most versatile artist of the group, had already designed costumes and furniture, while Rossetti, a flamboyant and charismatic figure, had emerged as an example and inspiration to the next generation of painters. He was undeniably an artist and poet of genius, and was not yet prone to the mental instability that afflicted him later in life. Burne-Jones, Morris and Webb were all at the beginning of their careers. Burne-Jones's painting and stained glass designs had become known to a small circle of admirers, whilst Webb was now making an independent reputation as an architect and designer of furniture and table glass. Morris, of course, in searching for a career which matched his talents, had gained sound practical knowledge of art and architecture, and was now absorbed in the decoration of his newly built home. The other partners are less well known to posterity. Charles Faulkner, once part of the Pembroke set', was a mathematician who had taken a double first. With the commencement of MMF & Co., he moved to London to assist his friends, also becoming articled to a firm of civil engineers. Marshall, a surveyor and sanitary engineer by profession, was a friend and pupil of Madox Brown and a clever amateur painter. All in all, they made an extraordinarily well-balanced, experienced, and intellectually vigorous team. Each of the partners held one £20 share, of which £1 was called up. The firm began trading with a £100 loan from Morris's mother. The way in which the firm came into being has long been taken to be evidence that Morris and his associates were casual amateurs in matters of business. Since the publication of Mackail's Life in 1899, historians have emphasised that the idea of forming a company arose out of the collective effort to beautify Morris's Red House and simply ‘sprang up amongst friends in talk'.2 Rossetti later remarked that ‘it was mere playing at business' and that the partners ‘had no idea whatever of commercial success'. He added that 'Morris was elected manager, not because we ever dreamed that he would turn out to be a man of business, but because he was the only one of us who had money to spare.'3 Hence it has been concluded that the origins of the firm weredelightfully casual'; that it was simply a loose association of friends with similar views and aims, and that it succeeded almost by accident.4 Rossetti's own attitude to the firm was, as will be seen, certainly casual', whether or not ‘delightfully' so; but his attribution of the same attitude to the rest of the team does not square with what we know of their professionalism, their aspirations, and their appreciation of the potential of the decorative arts. Burne-Jones, Webb and Faulkner were neither wealthy nor uninterested in money. They were young professionals on the threshold of challenging careers. It is inconceivable that they would have entered into partnership on a whim or simply for reasons of comradeship. Likewise, Madox Brown and Marshall were, as later events proved, driven in large measure by financial motives. And the charge of merely playing at business' cannot be made to stick in Morris's case for he, though having the luxury of a private income, was as eager as his friends for success and recognition. Rossetti is not a reliable source for the historian, and his account of the formation of MMF & Co. is best treated with some scepticism. The primary intention of the firm was to bring together artists, designers and architects with complementary skills to work on decorative art projects. From the outset, though, the partners recognised that some of them would be more involved than others and that the demand for the services of particular individuals would vary. Accordingly, they decided to hold weekly partners'meetings – usually chaired by Madox Brown or Burne-Jones – at which they would share out commissions, fix rates and discuss business matters generally. They devised an accounting system, whereby each partner had a separate account book. All payments – for work carried out, attendance at meetings, regular salary (where applicable) or extraordinary items - were credited to individual accounts as appropriate. Partners could withdraw funds or receive payment in kind (Burne-Jones virtually furnished his entire home in this way), so long as an account was kept in credit. The system had the advantage of flexibility, as individual earnings from the business corresponded to the level of effort each partner was prepared to put in.⁵ Rates of pay for similar jobs varied according to the level of skill brought to bear. So, for instance, Burne-Jones, Rossetti and Brown could expect to be paid more for stained glass cartoons than Morris or Marshall. (Despite his own efforts, and the encouragement of Rossetti, Morris was never to match the skills of some of the other partners as painter and cartoonist.) On 15 April 1863, for example, the minute book noted: distribution of the 4 major prophets for Bradford East window. Ezekiel and Daniel to Rossetti for £3. Isaiah and Jeremiah to Morris for the small sum of £2.'6 Morris's abilities were thought to lie elsewhere. Unlike the other partners. he had some experience of business. After receiving his shares in Devon Great Consols, it was considered natural that he should take more than a passing interest in Morris family investments. As early as 1856 he had joined his Uncle Francis on the board of a Cornish mining company in which the Morrises had a stake, giving him a first-hand, if very limited understanding of business finance and management. He had, furthermore, already demonstrated his drive and ability to organise in his work for the Oxford and Cambridge Magazine and his contribution to the painting of the Oxford Union in 1857.8 He was the natural choice for business manager of MMF & Co., and was granted a salary of £150 a year, as was the other salaried partner, Faulkner, who was given general managerial responsibilities and charged with keeping a detailed set of accounts. The degree of forethought and planning shown by the partners in MMF & Co. is hardly consistent with feckless amateurism or organisational ineptitude. Nor was there anything casual or lighthearted in the thinking which caused the seven partners to band together in this way. Morris and his circle were quite familiar with the concept of an association of artists. The Pre-Raphaelites provided a model and inspiration, as did the Hogarth Club, founded towards the end of 1858 by Madox Brown and his friends. Part social club and part exhibiting society (to make its artist members independent of the Royal Academy), it was also open to like-minded architects, writers and patrons. Its membership included Ruskin, Bodley, Street, Benjamin Woodward and Philip Webb. It proved short-lived — personality clashes abounded – and was wound up in 1861. Nevertheless, it provided a valuable forum for the exchange of ideas.º Even more influential was the Art Manufactures'group led by Henry Cole, which was certainly known to Morris and his friends. Since the 1840s Cole and his group had been, along with Pugin, the foremost critics of the vulgar incongruity of much industrial design. Cole was one of the instigators of the 1851 Great Exhibition and Director of the Department of Science and Art, later becoming a founder of the South Kensington Museum. He believed that design standards were low because able designers no longer worked closely with manufacturers. The result was that commercially produced goods, although cheap and competitive, tended to be adorned with tasteless and inappropriate decoration drawn from pattern books. Cole, who had produced designs for Mintons under the pseudonym Felix Summerly, actively encouraged the idea of an association of artists and designers which would provide designs for commercial production. Summerly's Art Manufactures, as the association was calleu, presented nearly 100 items at the third annual Exhibition of British Manufacturers, held by the Society of Arts in 1848. It was announced that ‘their execution should be entrusted only to the most eminent British manufacturers', and that the principal objective was ‘to obtain as much beauty and ornament as is consistent with cheapness'.10 But whereas the Art Manufactures group was concerned purely with designing for established manufacturers, the Morris group determined to involve itself in the production and marketing of its designs, bridging the perceived gulf between designer and producer. In this they followed Ruskin's passionate advocacy of the view that designers should learn craft skills, and acquire a working knowledge of the techniques and processes needed to produce an article.11 Manufacturers, correspondingly, were urged to improve the quality of their goods, to ‘forge the market' and educate public taste. Ruskin advised a gathering of businessmen: [you] must remember always that your business as manufacturers is to form the market, as much as to supply it. If, in short-sightedness and reckless eagerness for wealth, you catch at every humour of the populace . . . you may, by accident, snatch the market; or, by energy, command it . . . But whatever happens to you ... the whole of your life will have been spent corrupting public taste and encouraging public extravagance.12 The ambition of Morris and his colleagues to set new standards in the decorative arts drew added strength from their realisation of how well placed they were to carry out Ruskin's injunction to form the market rather than merely to supply it; making their products educational instruments that would be more influential for all kinds of good than many lecturers on art, or many treatise writers on morality'.13 An important advantage for MMF & Co. was the partners' knowledge of Gothic architecture, and their strong rapport with increasingly influential neo-Gothic architects – men like G. F. Bodley and G. E. Street, who were particular beneficiaries of the new appreciation of the splendour of the great medieval churches. The era of Gothic Revival church building was at its height, and one consequence of this was a surge in demand for the services of designers and decorative artists; stained glass, carved wood, murals, furniture and a host of other things were needed to adorn the new structures or breathe fresh life into older buildings. Thus splendid opportunities existed for those who could harmonise their thinking on interior design with that of leading architects. Plainly, this was something that Morris and his friends could do. Morris and Webb found they had much in common. A friend of Rossetti called Benjamin Woodward, who had done a good deal to encourage the nineteenth-century revival of stained glass, had introduced Rossetti to Powell & Sons of Whitefriars, the firm which led the return to supposedly medieval principles of stained glass-making in the 1840s and 1850s.14 Rossetti worked for Powells in the 1850s, and in 1856–57 he brought in Madox Brown and Burne-Jones, who designed for the Whitefriars firm until the formation of MMF & Co.15 These experiences helped convince the partners that a ready market could be found for work of the originality and quality they aimed to produce. Indeed, they stated their beliefs and intentions quite unambiguously in the prospectus announcing the formation of the firm. It emphasised that artists of reputation' should use their talents in decorative art, and pointed out the advantages of association; a group of artists working together could offer a much more complete service than they could as individuals: The growth of Decorative Art in this country owing to the effort of English Architects has now reached a point at which it seems desirable that Artists of reputation should devote their time to it. Although no doubt particular instances of success may be cited, still it must be generally felt that attempts of this kind hitherto have been crude and fragmentary. Up to this time want of artistic supervision, which can alone bring about harmony between the various parts of a successful work, has been increased by the necessarily excessive outlay consequent on taking one individual artist from his pictorial labour. The Artists whose names appear above hope by association to do away with this difficulty. Having among their number men of varied qualifications, they will be able to undertake any species of decoration, mural or otherwise, from pictures, properly so called, down to the consideration of the smallest work susceptible of art beauty. It is anticipated that by such co-operation, the largest amount of what is essentially the artist's work, along with his constant supervision, will be secured at the smallest possible expense, while the work must necessarily be of a much more complete order, than if any single artist were incidentally employed in this manner. These Artists having been for many years deeply attached to the study of the Decorative Arts of all time and countries, have felt more than most people the want of some one place, where they could either obtain or get produced work of a genuine and beautiful character. They have therefore now established themselves as a firm, for the production, by themselves, and under their supervision, of: I Mural Decoration, either in Pictures or in Pattern Work, or merely in the arrangement of Colours as applied to dwelling-houses, churches or public buildings. II Carving generally, as applied to Architecture. III Stained Glass, especially with reference to its harmony with Mural Decoration. IV Metal Work in all its branches, including Jewellery. V Furniture, either depending for its beauty on its own design, or on the application of materials hitherto overlooked, or on its conjuncture with Figure and Pattern Painting. Under this head is included Embroidery . .. besides every article necessary for domestic use. The prospectus concluded that ‘it is only requisite to state further, that work of all the above classes will be estimated for and executed in a business-like manner; and it is believed that good decoration, involving rather the luxury of taste than the luxury of costliness, will be found to be much less expensive than is generally supposed'.16 From the first, then, MMF & Co. set out to emphasise and publicise the originality and quality of its work, the high abilities and reputation of its members, and the professionalism of its organisation. MMF & Co. began life at 8 Red Lion Square, Bloomsbury, close by the rooms once shared by Morris and Burne-Jones. Offices and a showroom occupied the first floor, while the third floor and part of the basement were converted into workshops. The main problem faced by the partners was to generate sufficient work to make the venture worthwhile. The wideranging nature of the prospectus, notwithstanding its assertiveness, suggests a degree of uncertainty about the market, about precisely which skills and products they might be able to sell in any quantity. Their strength was that they were personally acquainted with many architects well placed to recommend them. If some of these key individuals could be persuaded to favour MMF & Co., then it might win enough business to take root. Thus, as soon as the partners had moved into the workshops in Red Lion Square, they began to put together a display of examples of the kind of work they might undertake; demonstrating their excellence in design, manufacturing skills, and all-round professionalism. They set out very positively to make a mark and win a good reputation. Stained glass was the most obvious starting-point for business growth. The fact that Rossetti and Madox Brown were partners inspired enough confidence in some architects for them to recommend MMF & Co. at once as suppliers of top quality stained glass, especially since the partners were never shy about exploiting their connections. Even so, it was necessary for the firm to make up samples of their wares at once for inspection by potential clients. The urgent need to develop a stock of designs and samples, and the prevailing uncertainty as to which line of business might in the end prove most successful, threw the partners into a bout of creative activity which lasted for more than two years. Webb was particularly active. He designed sets of table glass (wine glasses, finger bowls, tumblers and other items) which were made for MMF & Co. by Powells. He also busied himself designing jewellery and furniture. The jewellery was made by a craftsman who occupied the ground floor of 8 Red Lion Square. A local cabinet-maker executed the furniture designs.17 Webb's furniture was largely of oak, often stained black, with flat panel decoration. It has been described as Gothic' furniture, but it did not have the spiky crockets and other architectural borrowings which the epithet conjures up. Rather, it was plain and substantial. Webb was in fact putting into effect the principles which his mentor, Street, had set out in his 1853 lecture, ‘The Revival of the Ancient Style of Domestic Architecture'. Street insisted that furniture should possess ‘no sham or incongruous ornaments'such as pointed arches, crockets or finials, but should be really simple, with no more material consumed in their construction than was necessary for their solidity'.18 This was a view shared by all the partners in MMF & Co. Madox Brown, for instance, produced designs for plain rush-seated chairs in stained oak, and is generally credited with having originated the green stained finish which became widely popular towards the end of the nineteenth century.19 An analysis of one of the two surviving balance sheets for MMF & Co., drawn up at 31 December 1862, confirms the importance of stained glass, table glass and furniture to the firm. It can be seen from Table 2 that very little investment was needed in plant and equipment, and that the greater part of the capital needed was to finance stock accumulation, work in progress, and deficits on customer accounts. The largest element of the finished goods figure of £341. 60 was £205.60 for furniture, compared to figures of £76.00 and £60.00 for domestic glass and painted tiles respectively. The figure for work in progress is more difficult to disaggregate as most relevant entries in the balance sheet, totalling £278.00, refer to commissions for church decoration, mainly, though not exclusively, with stained glass. The largest debt to a supplier, as one might expect, was to Powells, which was owed £193.00 for coloured glass and the manufacture of table glass designs. Stained glass, furniture and table glass may have formed the bulk of the firm's early products, but the surviving evidence also points to a tremendous spurt of activity in other crafts. At the end of 1862 the firm had a stock of unworked fabrics worth £42.85, and a stock of paper worth £17.00 ready for printing with wallpaper designs. Table 2 Morris, Marshall, Faulkner & Co.: balance sheet at 31 December 1862
