# Theorizing Fashion and Dress The previous chapter argues for a study of fashion/dress that acknowledges the way in which it operates on the body, producing discourses about the body as well as practices of dress which work on the living, phenomenal body. While literature on the body has so far almost entirely ignored fashion, literature on fashion has generally ignored the body. What is needed is an account of fashion and dress which looks at the ways in which they are interrelated. The idea of fashion/dress as situated bodily practice acknowledges a very basic sociological tension between structure and agency: structures such as the fashion system impose parameters around dress; however, within these constraints, individuals can be creative in their interpretations of fashion and their practices of dress. Various terms are employed in the literature: ‘fashion' and 'dress', 'clothing', 'costume', 'adornment' and 'decoration', 'style' are among the most obvious; establishing the distinctions between them is an essential starting-point for this chapter. Different disciplines tend towards one or other term and therefore one way to make sense of the terminology is to locate these words within disciplinary traditions. For example, the terms 'dress' and ‘adornment' are associated with anthropological literature, a major strand of which involves the search for universals and therefore an all-inclusive term that denotes all the things people do to their bodies in order to modify them. These words can be said to describe a more general kind of activity than either fashion' or costume'. The term ‘fashion'carries with it the more specific meaning of a system of dress that is found in western modernity and as such is generally used within sociology or cultural studies as well as by social or cultural historians of fashion, while the term ‘costume'tends to be found in historical texts. However, while it is possible to discern a body of anthropological literature on dress' distinct from a sociological, historical and cultural body of literature on fashion', in practice the picture is more complex than this. Far from clearly employing one or other term and defining it precisely, there is a considerable degree of confusion in the various bodies of literature with many authors employing a number of different terms, often using them interchangeably. A review of the literature illustrates the fact that there is no consensus on the definition and use of these words and no agreement on precisely what phenomena they describe. The aims of this chapter are therefore two-fold: the first is to address the relative lack of sociological research on fashion and dress; the second is to summarize the literature that has emerged from anthropology, art history, cultural studies and social psychology in relation to fashion and dress. However, before embarking on such a discussion, the terms ‘dress’and‘fashion'need defining and the way in which they are interrelated needs clarification. This involves considering their definitions within various bodies of literature and the debates that have emerged around them. ## Defining the Terms ## Sociology and anthropology: defining the difference Anthropology and the disciplines of modernity (sociology, cultural studies, psychology) adopt different approaches to the body and matters of its adornment. Turner (1985) gives a clear summary of the important distinctions between anthropology and sociology and his book can be drawn on to explain the different approaches taken by both disciplines to bodily adornment as well as account for the differences in terminology. He notes that, at its inception in the nineteenth century, anthropology focused attention on ontological questions about the nature of humanity, in particlar through the distinction between nature and culture. The result of this interest was the emergence of a major strand concerned with the search for universals, the things that pertain to all peoples and cultures. He goes on to note that classical sociology, on the other hand, is not concerned with ontological distinctions and universals but with historicity and the forms of social life that emerge with modernity. ## 42 Theorizing Fashion and Dress This distinction between anthropology and sociology is a historical one which has changed in recent years: anthropology now studies modern western societies and not just traditional communities, while, as argued in chapter 1, since the 1970s or so a sociology of the body has emerged to address questions of the body. The historical difference between the two disciplines, however, has made for discernibly different traditions of writing: an anthropological body of literature concerned with accounts of ‘dress' or adornment', evident in the work of Barnes and Eicher (1992), Cordwell and Schwarz (1979) and Polhemus and Proctor (1978); and another body of literature on ‘fashion' in modern societies, produced by theorists from sociology, cultural studies and psychology (Ash and Wilson 1992, Bell 1976, Flügel 1930, Lurie 1981, Simmel 1971, Veblen 1953, Wilson 1985). This distinction still holds, although there is also considerable cross-fertilization between the various disciplines. Contemporary anthropological literature tends to focus on the meanings and practices of adornment or dress in non-western cultures, or, in the case of some anthropological collections such as Barnes and Eicher (1992), Cordwell and Schwarz (1979) and Polhemus and Proctor (1978), there is an interest in cross-cultural variations which might involve considering dress in the western fashion system as well. Another feature of this anthropology is an ethnographic concern with practices surrounding dress, clothing and fabric. The authors of the fashion literature, however, unlike anthropologists, are less interested in ethnographic accounts of the practices surrounding dress than in the fashion system, which they treat in a historical or theoretical rather than ethnographic or empirical way. ## Defining dress The early anthropological concern with universals led anthropologists such as Benthall (1976) and Polhemus and Proctor (1978) to argue that there was a universal human propensity to adorn. This argument is now widely accepted by writers on dress and fashion, and anthropological evidence that all cultures ‘dress' the body and that no culture leaves the body ‘unadorned' is cited by most of the key texts in the area. Indeed, it is taken for granted in contemporary anthropological texts on dress. The nineteenth-century concern to demonstrate the universality of adornment has therefore been displaced by concern with the actual practices and meanings of human adornment and the meanings and practices of particular garments (Barnes and Eicher 1992). However, there still remains a concern within recent anthropological works to define an appropriately universal and all-inclusive term to describe ‘all the things people do to or put on to their bodies in order to make the human form, in their eyes, more attractive'(Polhemus and Proctor 1978: 9), although the notion of being ‘attractive' is only one explanation for the many body modifications performed by various cultures, as I discuss below. Anthropological works such as Roach and Eicher (1965), Polhemus and Proctor (1978) and Barnes and Eicher (1992) often open their introductions by asserting the need for, as Roach and Eicher put it, ‘the most descriptive and inclusive' phrase to describe the human act of adorning. The terms 'adornment' and 'dress' are most commonly used by anthropologists such as Roach and Eicher. 'Dress', they suggest, signals ‘an act' that emphasizes ‘the process of covering', while ‘adornment stresses the aesthetic aspects of altering the body'(1965: 1). Given that the form of activity that constitutes most adornment in the west involves covering the body with garments, as opposed to scarification or tattooing, 'dress'is perhaps the most suitable term to use for this process in this book, since it captures the idea of the act (or series of acts) involved. Indeed, this activity is neatly summed up in the everyday words we use to describe our practices of preparing the body, such as ‘getting dressed' or 'dressing up'. However, 'dress'does not exclude the possibility of encompassing the aesthetic concept of 'adornment': the choices made in getting dressed can be aesthetic as much as ‘functional'. Moreover, as demonstrated below, in the west the practice of ‘getting dressed' is framed by the fashion system, one dimension of which is aesthetics. The fashion system not only provides garments for wear, it endows garments with beauty and desirability, sometimes making direct contact with art. In doing so, it weaves aesthetics into the daily practice of dressing. However, before any discussion of fashion can take place, a more precise definition is needed. ## Defining fashion Barnes and Eicher (1992) and Polhemus and Proctor (1978) disagree on the meaning of the term 'fashion'. Polhemus and Proctor argue that ‘fashion' refers to a special system of dress, one that is historically and geographically specific to western modernity. In contrast, Barnes and Eicher do not recognize fashion as a special instance of dress, and indeed make no reference to it except to argue that it is a mistake for researchers to consider fashion as ‘a characteristic only of societies ## 44 Theorizing Fashion and Dress with complex technology'(1992: 23). On the other hand, the literature produced by the disciplines of modernity – sociology, history, cultural studies, psychoanalysis and social psychology - have persuasively argued that fashion must be considered as a distinctive system for the provision of clothes. Fashion is understood as a historically and geographically specific system for the production and organization of dress, emerging over the course of the fourteenth century in the European courts, particularly the French court of Louis XIV, and developing with the rise of mercantile capitalism (Bell 1976, Finkelstein 1991, Flügel 1930, Laver 1969, 1995, McDowell 1992, Polhemus and Proctor 1978, Rouse 1989, Veblen 1953, Wilson 1985). Wilson's account, for example, situates fashion as a feature in the emergence and development of western modernity. These authors all agree that fashion emerges within a particular kind of society, one where social mobility is possible. One recurring theme, proposed by Bell (1976), Simmel (1971) and Veblen (1953), and more recently McDowell (1992) and Tseëlon (1992a), is that during the movement towards a capitalist society and the emergence of a bourgeois class, fashion developed as a tool in the battle for social status. Fashion, they argue, was one of the means adopted by the new capitalist class to challenge aristocratic power and status, first by openly flouting the sumptuary laws imposed by royalty and aristocracy, and second, by adopting and aggressively keeping pace with fashion in an attempt to maintain status and distinction (Simmel 1971, Veblen 1953). These authors support the idea that ‘emulation' is a motivating factor in fashion (this theory is discussed more fully both below and in chapter 3). Thus, as Bell (1976) and Braudel (1981) argue, fashion is not found in feudal Europe, which provided little opportunity for social movement. It is also not found in contemporary cultures where social hierarchies are rigid, although it has increasingly developed a global reach through the spread of consumer capitalism. Fashion, then, is a particular system of dress found under particular social circumstances. Tseëlon (1992a) argues that the history of fashion can be divided into three major stages: classical, modernist and postmodernist. The classical period of fashion, from the fourteenth to the eighteenth century, saw the feudal status order challenged by the expansion of trade and the rise of 'urban patricians'. However, dress still marked 'the courtly from common'more clearly than during the modern and postmodern period, in which the relationship between clothes and social hierarchy has been progressively challenged. In his influential analysis, J. C. Flügel (1930) made the distinction between‘fixed' and ‘modish' dress: the latter type predominates in the west, ‘a fact that must be regarded as one of the most characteristic features of modern European civilisation'(Flügel, quoted in Rouse 1989: 73). In contrast to ‘modish'dress, ‘fixed’dress is another term for traditional dress, such as the kimono or sari, which is characterized by its continuity with the past rather than the logic of 'change for change's sake'. As Rouse (1989) notes, this kind of dress can also be found in traditional communities within the west such as the Hasidic Jewish community in Britain. In a similar vein, Polhemus and Proctor (1978) point out that the official dress of Queen Elizabeth II is likewise largely immune to fashion, her coronation clothing in 1953, for example, implying continuity rather than change. There is, therefore, consensus among a number of theorists regarding the definition of fashion as a system of dress characterized by an internal logic of regular and systematic change: as Wilson puts it, ‘fashion is dress in which the key feature is rapid and continual changing of styles: fashion in a sense is change' (1985: 3). Similarly, Davis argues that ‘clearly any definition of fashion seeking to grasp what distinguishes it from style, custom, conventional or acceptable dress, or prevalent modes must place its emphasis on the element of change we often associate with the term'(1992: 14). Not only can fashion be said to have emerged under specific social and historical circumstances and developed its own momentum, quite unlike that of dress associated either with feudal society in Europe or traditional communities in existence today, but the actual economic, industrial and technological dynamics of clothing provision under fashion also need to be considered when defining it. Fashion'is a general term which can be used to refer to any kind of systemic changes in social life, in architecture or even academia; the ‘fashion system'as it pertains to dress refers to a particular set of arrangements for the production and distribution of clothing. Most historians of fashion such as Bell (1976) and cultural theorists such as Wilson (1985) agree that the fashion system refers to a particular industry, a special and unique system for the production and consumption of dress that was born out of historical and technological developments in Europe. Indeed, given the momentum of systemic change inherent in the notion of fashion, very particular relations of production have to develop. The phrase 'fashion system' as used in this book refers to the relationship between the manufacturing, marketing and distribution of clothing into retail outlets. In her account of the fashion system, Leopold (1992) argues that fashion is ‘a hybrid subject' requiring the study of the interconnectedness between production and consumption. Fine's and Leopold's materialist analysis (1993) points to the need for historical specificity in the analysis of the fashion system and argues that the fashion system under capitalism comprises very particular relations of production and distribution. Indeed, as discussed in chapter 7, there are different modes within the fashion system, as women's fashion is organized rather differently from men's and children's. Leopold (1992) states that fashion should be considered a complex system, so that it can be understood not just as a cultural phenomenon, but as an aspect of manufacturing and technology as well as marketing and retail. The same acknowledgement of fashion as ‘hybrid' comes from Ash and Wright (1988) and also from Willis and Midgley (1973), who suggest that the study of fashion requires an integrated approach combining the study of technology, politics, economics, social context, communities and individuals. However, as Leopold (1992) suggests, such an approach has yet to emerge, with most fashion literature focusing attention on either supply or consumption. This consensus on the nature of fashion as an aspect of western modernity has been explicitly challenged by Craik (1993) and Barnes and Eicher (1992). The latter do not give a precise definition of what they mean by the term but argue that there is no reason to differentiate fashion as a special system of dress found only in some cultures. Indeed, they go so far as to talk about fashions in scarification, suggesting that 'old fashions in the design and texture of scarification give way to new ones'(1992: 22-3). This use of the word fashion'is entirely at odds with the authors discussed above, who argue for a structural and historically specific definition of fashion. There are two problems with Barnes's and Eicher's argument: they fail to define what they mean by fashion (although they would seem to use the term to refer to any dress that changes); and they criticize those authors who identify it with changing style on the basis that they assume that traditional dress is unchanging. However, this is a misrepresentation of the idea of fashion as used by many authors such as Polhemus and Proctor (1978) and Bell (1976) who do not argue that no change in traditional dress takes place. Here the use of the word ‘fixed' by Flügel (1930) is misleading, since it does imply that no change takes place in traditional dress when it is more likely that modifications to dress do occur, but not at the speed and with the regularity of fashion in modern societies. With this in mind, Polhemus and Proctor (1978) more usefully distinguish fashion'and ‘antifashion' instead of 'modish'and ‘fixed'dress. They therefore argue that ‘anti-fashion'(for example folk dress) is not fixed and unchanging. Rather, folk dress changes slowly, often so slowly that the changes are imperceptible to the people themselves (Polhemus and Proctor 1978). Bell (1976) similarly contrasts modern and traditional dress when he compares European dress since the fourteenth century with traditional dress in China. He argues that there must have been variations in dress from dynasty to dynasty but these would be not of the dramatic kind found in Europe where fashionable dress is characterized by the logic of ‘change for change's sake'. To return to the argument about scarification (Barnes and Eicher 1992): while certain styles may be open to change, these are not driven by the logic of regular and systemic change characteristic of fashion in the west; their application of the term ‘fashion' in this context is therefore inappropriate. Craik (1993) has also attacked what she considers the ethnocentrism of authors who apply the term ‘fashion'only to western communities. Like Barnes and Eicher (1992), she fails to define what she means by fashion, and this is the most serious flaw in her argument. The closest she comes to a definition is to suggest that ‘in short, the western fashion system goes hand in hand with the exercise of power' which she goes on to argue is also true of other fashion systems found in non-western cultures: ‘the exercise of power cannot simply be associated with the unfolding development of modern consumer capitalism'(Craik 1993: x). In this way, she employs a rather idiosyncratic and narrow conception of fashion which focuses on power and neglects the other features of fashion defined by a large number of historians and cultural theorists. She goes on to reject the accepted view of fashion as a western system of dress on the grounds that it is based upon a privileging of the elite fashions of haute couture which bear little or no relation to the everyday dress of most people in the west. However, she fails to see that much of the contemporary literature on fashion no longer restricts itself to haute couture and now includes everyday dress or‘streetstyle'(Polhemus 1994, Ash and Wilson 1992). In short, Craik's assertion that ‘fashion systems should not be confined to particular economic or cultural sets of arrangements'(1993: x) goes unqualified and ungrounded, while her own conception of fashion is vague. Furthermore, it could also be argued that in failing to take account of specific social and historical conditions - including conditions for the production and consumption of fashion - that underpin the fashion system, it is Craik who is guilty of ethnocentrism, universalizing fashion as a system of dress found in all cultures. In sum, the evidence for treating fashion as a historically and geographically specific system of dress is overwhelming and convincing. There are several features which make-up the commonly accepted definition of fashion, as argued earlier: it is a system of dress found in societies where social mobility is possible; it has its own particular relations of production and consumption, again found in a particular sort of society; it is characterized by a logic of regular and systemic change. ## Everyday Dress and Fashion Having outlined the main terms to be used – dress' as an activity of clothing the body with an aesthetic element (as in ‘adornment') and fashion' as a specific system of dress - it is now possible to discuss the relationship between these two. A number of authors, such as Wilson (1985), have argued that the fashion system provides the raw material for most everyday dress, not only producing the garments themselves, but also discourses and aesthetic ideas around the garments. These discourses of fashion serve to present clothes as meaningful, indeed beautiful and desirable for, as Rouse (1989) puts it, fashion is more than a commodity, it is ‘an attribute with which some styles are endowed. For a particular style of clothing to become fashion it actually has to be worn by some people and recognized and acknowledged to be fashion'(1989: 69). Fashion therefore refers not just to the production of some styles as popular or elite, but also to the production of aesthetic ideas which serve to structure the reception and consumption of styles. The ‘fashion system', as defined by Leopold (1992), comprises not only manufacturing and the provision of certain styles of clothing, but also marketing, retail and cultural processes; all of these serve to produce fashion' and in doing so structure almost all experiences of everyday dress, excepting some forms of dress practice found in traditional and sometimes religious communities in the west. This structuring influence is so strong that, as Wilson (1985) argues, even dress which is labelled 'old-fashioned' and dress which is consciously oppositional to fashion is meaningful only because of its relationship to the dominant aesthetic propagated by fashion. Alternative dress is ‘alternative' in relation to prevailing styles and also, in some cases, in relation to lifestyle. Indeed, devising an alternative uniform' was an important feature in many nineteenth-century Utopian movements which aimed, according to Luck, to give members a ‘family likeness' which 'marked their difference from outsiders, thus acting as a powerful indicator of shared values and community boundaries' (1992: 202). The various dress reform movements of the nineteenth century adopted styles of dress which were oppositional to the prevailing fashionable aesthetic: campaigns against the corset posed an alternative, natural’waist for women, while bifurcated dress was proposed by some Utopian thinkers and feminists of the nineteenth century as an alternative to the crinoline skirts of their time (Luck 1992, Newton 1974, Ribeiro 1992, Steele 1985). However, fashion is not the only determinant on everyday dress. One tendency in fashion literature is to place too great an emphasis on fashion as the central determining force of dress at any given moment. While fashion is important for defining styles at a given moment, these styles are always mediated by other social factors, such as class, gender, ethnicity, age, occupation, income and body shape, to name but a few. Not all fashions are adopted by all individuals: at any one time some aspects of fashion may be taken on board while others are rejected. Other important social factors that influence clothing decisions include historical bonds to now traditional national costume (for example, kilts and the use of tartan in Scotland) and, in everyday life, the social situation or context one is to enter. Different situations impose different ways of dressing, sometimes by imposing ‘rules' or codes of dress or sometimes simply through conventions that most people adhere to most of the time. Weddings, funerals, job interviews, shopping, hiking, sports, clubbing and so on all impose particular ways of dressing and serve to constrain dress choices. Even when individuals choose to ignore such codes of dress, they are likely at least to be aware of the pressure to conform and that their decision not to do so might be read as rebellious. The factors listed here are not meant to be exhaustive, but are intended to suggest some of the kinds of social factors influencing everyday dress within the fashion system. I now discuss these factors in more detail to demonstrate how fashion is only one determining factor on dress. Polhemus and Proctor (1978) have considered the social influences impinging on dress in both western and non-western cultures. They suggest, for instance, that class is effectively marked out by dress and that these class associations do not necessarily come from fashion. They note that members of the upper class use clothes to mark out their identity, adopting their 'own traditional anti-fashion costume’the symbolism of which is 'lasting quality' and aggressive anti-fashion'(1978: 68). They give the example that opera dress at Glyndebourne cannot always be accurately dated. 'The symbolism of quality and classic style adopted by the upper class contradicts the view that‘fashion is the prerogative of the upper class’(1978: 68). They also cite the Burberry, a light raincoat, usually of gabardine, the style of which has changed little over the years, as an example of this class's predilection for anti-fashion'. It is sometimes argued that the middle classes once used fashion as a weapon for social climbing and that they now have their own styles of dress which are resistant to fashion: for example, while changing slowly over time, the general style of the business man has remained quite consistent; similarly, the middle-class style of Laura Ashley changes very little with each season and does not respond particularly to the swings of fashion. It would therefore seem that class is one feature of dress and plays a role in predisposing individuals to particular styles, not all of which exhibit the fashion impulse of change, but sometimes the anti-fashion impulse of continuity. However, the notion of anti-fashion proposed by Polhemus and Proctor and its adoption by a class grouping has meaning only in relation to fashion. Given the arbitrary swings fashion takes, it is always possible that an anti-fashion item like the Burberry can temporarily lose some of its class association, becoming just another fashion. Obviously class has a material bearing on clothing choices. In particular, class tends to determine income and this needs to be considered as a factor in choices of purchase. $S \mathrm { o } ,$ for example, only a minority of the world's women have the income required to purchase haute couture (Colderidge 1989) and even 'off-the-peg'designer clothes, offered by many couture houses, remain beyond the reach of most people. However, class also structures dress decisions through taste. A taste for high-quality clothing will have a bearing on how much money is spent: the upper-class notion of ‘quality and not quantity' will be reflected not only in decisions about the amount spent on individual items, but on the fabrics chosen (for example, silk, linen and cashmere as opposed to their synthetic substitutes). The predisposition to certain kinds of fabric and the notion of quality'may be explained in the notion of 'cultural capital'(Bourdieu 1984). Knowing what counts as quality and recognizing it in the dress of others requires knowledge in the form of 'cultural capital'. Indeed, in an age when jeans and casual clothes are worn by all, making class less obviously discernible in dress, it could be argued that finer gradations of difference require an ever greater degree of cultural capital. Those ‘in the know' are likely to spot the distinction between a Savile Row suit and a high-street one, a designer dress and its cheap high-street imitations. Taste is closely linked to the body, indeed it is a bodily experience, since to talk of having a taste for a particular food or item of clothing is to refer to the sensual qualities of the thing itself. The taste orientations of classes are therefore, in part, bodily orientations. These bodily orientations are captured by Bourdieu's concept of the habitus which refers to the bodily dispositions of classes. This concept, discussed in more detail in chapters 1 and $^ { 4 , }$ is used by Bourdieu to convey the idea that class position is reproduced through bodily dispositions. All classes have their own ways of inhabiting the body – walking, talking, body postures, gestures and the like, which convey subtle information about class. Although he does not say so, this applies equally to dress: a taste for fine linen, silk or cashmere carries subtle indications of one's class that can be used to mark out oneself as ‘distinctive'or a person of 'good taste'. Peer groups, and in particular youth subcultures, also play a part in predisposing their members to particular styles of dress and involve the deployment of ‘subcultural capital’ in the interpretation and understanding of style (Thornton 1995). As Brake (1985) notes, style is important in marking out the subcultural group identity not only to those within the subculture, but to those outside. In his now classic study of youth subcultures, Hebdige (1979) considers the important role played by style in the subculture. He notes that the subculture plunders consumer culture, adopting certain commodities as its own, often to the extent that the commodity becomes shorthand for the group itself: the moped for the mods, the safety pin or ripped clothes for punks. This plundering orappropriation' sees the subculture inflect' these commodities with its own meanings, often subverting the original meaning of the commodity in mainstream culture. The teddy boys' adoption of the Savile Row gentleman's suit is one example of a style of dress 'inflected' with a rather different meaning from its original association as upper-class dress. On the body of the teddy boy, the zoot suit' became inflected with a menacing, working-class aggression (Cosgrove 1989). A further aspect framing the clothing choices of individuals comes from occupation. While this might not affect all the decisions made about dress, only ones that pertain to daily working life, this experience of dressing can take up a significant amount of time, energy and expense. Many occupations within the working or lower middle classes prescribe a uniform or lay down clear rules of dress, restricting the types of garments and colours suitable for work. The professions, on the other hand, generally operate with looser codes of dress that are left up to the individual to interpret. As shown in my analysis of the dress choices of female professionals (Entwistle 2000), different occupational settings exhibit different codes of dress: law and banking will tend to be less fashion conscious than the media and creative professions. Within these constraints, individual professional women interpret what is and what is not appropriate to wear to work. Finally, while the social factors thus far discussed mediate everyday dress, they do not in themselves produce a singular and uniform method of dressing for a particular class or peer or occupational group. Most individuals do not wear the same clothes to all occasions, but rather adapt their dress for the particular social context they are to enter. This is true in the case of some youth subcultures, such as the mods, who, as Hebdige (1979) suggests, adapted their dress to the demands of work (usually clerical work) and the demands of theweekend' when they could devote greater attention to subcultural activities such as dress. The social situation therefore plays an important part in structuring dress choices. I now move on to gender, perhaps the single most important factor in practices of dress in almost all social situations where dressed bodies meet. Fashion is 'obsessed with gender... constantly working and reworking the gender boundary'(Wilson 1985: 117) and thus any consideration of dress cannot leave out recognition of gender. This is discussed in more detail in chapter 5 but it is important to note here that it is difficult to consider gender as a category separate from class, peer group and occupation, since the concept of gender is constituted differently by each, and is constituted differently according to the social context. Codes of gender vary enormously, depending on all sorts of factors operating in a given context. The skirt, for example, is the most heavily gender-coded garment, worn almost exclusively by women in the west, often explicitly enforced in certain dress codes, for example those of exclusive restaurants and nightclubs where women are supposed to lookfeminine', or more subtly enforced by social convention as in the case of certain professional occupations such as business, politics or law where a skirt is ‘preferred'. However, it is also possible for some women never to wear a skirt if their occupation and lifestyle do not demand it, while in a number of different contexts skirts are worn by men (at an official ceremony in Scotland, at a drag night' in a club, at an avant-garde fashion event and so on). If fashion is ‘obsessed with gender' and constantly plays with the gender boundary, precisely how it does so and precisely how gender gets codified in dress is highly variable and dependent upon factors operating within the social context. Gender is refracted through these many factors and is produced differently within different situations. The discussion above points to the complexity of fashion and the necessity of employing an analysis of it which examines the interactions between fashion and a host of other social factors. To understand dress in everyday life requires acknowledging a wide range of social factors that frame individual clothing decisions, of which fashion is important, but by no means the only factor. ## Approaches to Fashion and Dress ## Sociology and fashion The sociological neglect of fashion reflects the historical location of fashion within the arts rather than within the social sciences, although the most cursory consideration of fashion demonstrates its sociological importance as an individual yet social, active yet structured, creative yet controlled phenomenon: in short, a perfect example of structure and action. (Edwards 1997: 1) As the above quotation from Edwards notes, fashion has been largely neglected by sociology, a fact which he explains in terms of its historical location in the arts. This neglect is surprising when one considers that fashion has been important to the development and character of western modernity and remains an industry of considerable economic and cultural significance today. Further, when one considers how important fashion is in framing our everyday choices about dress, how it is a major structuring influence in the social presentation of the body in everyday life, it seems quite remarkable that sociology should have largely ignored it. The reasons why sociology has not tackled fashion and the forms of everyday dress found in the west are not clear. However, one possible explanation is that from its inception in the nineteenth century sociology tended to focus on action and rationality, a fact that meant the subsequent repression of the body as an object of sociological investigation and thus the neglect of practices, such as dress, which surround it (Benthall 1976, Berthelot 1991, Turner 1985). Furthermore, as Polhemus (1988) suggests, western society has largely dismissed body decoration and adornment as unimportant, ephemeral nonsense, unworthy of serious analysis. Fashion has also been subject to prejudices which prevent it from being taken seriously; it has been viewed as trivial, frivolous, irrational, wasteful and ugly, Bell argues that ‘the seeming triviality of such questions, the virtual impossibility of linking our sartorial decisions with the grand spiritual passions of mankind, make clothes not less but more important to those who seek to understand their fellow men'(1976: 16–17). Even several of the few classic studies which have attempted to treat fashion in a serious manner have fallen prey to some of these prejudices (Baudrillard 1981, Flügel 1930, Veblen 1953; see also Wilson 1985 for an account of these). An additional ingredient which makes fashion even more prone to condemnation is its connection to ‘vanity'. This is one example of how fashion is often the subject of moral discussion and censure. However, as Bell (1976) and McDowell (1992) in particular point out, this moral component is itself testimony to the power and significance of dress in the social world: that dress is burdened with so many moral provisos is a proof of its power and significance within society'. And yet ‘in clear contradiction of the fact, many writers have persisted in denigrating an interest in fashion as proof of vanity, or worse, and are critical of those who take more than a fleeting interest in appearance'(1992: 15). Despite the influence of postmodernism, which has served to reevaluate old hierarchies of cultural value, these prejudices still linger and fashion is still the subject of moral and aesthetic condemnation (Baudrillard 1981, Veblen 1953). A further explanation for the low status of fashion vis-à-vis sociological analysis, according to Polhemus (1988) and Tseëlon (1997), is its association with the ‘feminine'. The subject (or object?) of fashion is commonly thought to be the woman who falls prey to the dreadful’ delights of fashion. Moreover, Polhemus (1988) argues that pursuits labelled ‘frivolous'and ‘foolish'tend to be those associated with women. Until around the 1980s consumption practices associated with women were neglected or treated with derision. A number of feminists, in particular those associated with cultural studies, have pointed out that, within the.Academy, feminine consumer behaviour such as the reading of romance novels or the enjoyment of soap operas has traditionally been downgraded as silly and trivial (e.g. Ang 1985, Radway 1987). By implication, condemning fashion as trivial, silly and vain has meant an implicit condemnation of women and women's culture (Tseëlon 1997). Some of this condemnation of fashion has come from feminists who have not meant to criticize the women who wear fashion but characterize women's relationship to fashion as one of exploitation. This kind of critique has been directed at certain garments, such as the corset, which some feminists regard as oppressive (Roberts 1977). In addition to medical and aesthetic criticisms of the corset enunciated by the Dress Reform Movement, feminist voices have been raised against it (see Kunzle 1982, Newton 1974, Steele 1985 for a summary of these arguments). Feminist theory has become rather more confused on the matter of women's relationship to fashion but has at least begun to recognize the pleasure it affords women (Evans and Thornton 1989, Wilson 1985). Fashion, as Edwards (1997) argues, is about the individual and the social, a creative force on the one hand, and a structured (and structuring) phenomenon on the other, and he is right to point out that these facts alone make it an obvious candidate for sociology which has typically concerned itself with the questions of structure and agency. However, these questions have not been the prime focus of studies of fashion in those disciplines which have studied it since fashion writing, from art history, psychoanalysis, social psychology to cultural studies which tend to address other issues. Research on fashion and dress in these areas has concerned itself with various questions, for example: how and why does fashion change as it does? (a common concern of costume history); or what does fashion mean and what form of communication is it? (a frequent concern of social psychology and also cultural studies). There is, therefore, a tendency in the literature on fashion to find a general theory or overarching explanation for its presence in western society. This all too often leads to explanations which are reductive and deny the complexity of fashion. I argue that the study of fashion needs to analyse the way in which social forces framing dress - such as the fashion system, social location, class, income, gender, ethnicity, region and occupation – structure dress in everyday life. In other words, I advocate a study of fashion and dress which would analyse how they relate to each other: how fashion structures dress and how dress always involves the creative interpretation of fashion by individuals. Such a study takes for granted Edwards's contention that fashion is a phenomenon involving both agency and structure and would counteract the tendency towards generalization and simplification characteristic of the current literature. ## Addressing the literature on fashion Addressing the literature on fashion requires crossing many disciplinary boundaries. The diversity of disciplines and approaches within the literature is further testimony to Leopold's claim that fashion is a ‘hybrid subject' (1992: 101). Fashion is treated as an aspect of industry, manufacturing, marketing, design and aesthetics, consumption and lifestyle. It has attracted the attention of theorists working in different fields and operating from very different viewpoints. The degree of interest fashion has attracted among many disciplines makes sociology's relative silence all the more intriguing. As argued above, anthropology has treated dress with some seriousness as a universal feature of human culture, although it focuses more attention on non-western dress. The analysis of western dress, specifically the development of fashion, has been explored by a range of disciplines, some closely related to sociology. One major strand is costume history, which developed out of art history as a means of dating paintings. This body of literature explores the development of styles and techniques of dress, usually haute couture and elite fashions, and is largely descriptive (e.g. Gorsline 1991, Kohler 1963, Ribeiro 1983, Tarrant 1994). Out of this literature has sprung cultural and social histories such as Breward (1994), de la Haye (1988) and Hollander (1993, 1994), which attempt some analysis of the cultural context of fashion, and Taylor and Wilson (1989), who examine styles of dress from the Victorian era to the present day, focusing on what ordinary'people have worn. A further branch of fashion literature includes histories and contemporary accounts of the economic and technological aspects of the fashion system (e.g. Leopold 1992, Fine and Leopold 1993) and those accounts (e.g. Chapkis and Enloe 1984, Coyle 1982, Elson 1984, Phizacklea 1990, Ross 1997) which examine the exploitation of sweated workers within the fashion system. Cultural studies now also explore the contemporary fashion system (Ash and Wright 1988, Ash and Wilson 1992, Davis 1992, Craik 1993) as well as the nature of fashion representations (Brooks 1989, Evans and Thornton 1989, Lewis 1996, Nixon 1996). This work has been framed by a number of theoretical perspectives: Marxist materialist analysis (Leopold 1992), structuralism (Barthes 1985), semiotics (Hebdige 1979), psychoanalysis (Flügel 1930, Lewis and Rolley 1997, Nixon 1996, Silverman 1986), social psychology (Soloman 1985, Tseëlon 1997) and post-structuralism (Entwistle 1997a, 1997b, Nixon 1996, Wilson 1992). I want to explore the various approaches that have been adopted in relation to fashion. Three approaches can be discerned across the literature, defined not by discipline but by the kinds of question they ask and the theoretical and methodological approach taken. The first starts out by asking such questions as, why wear clothes?, questions that tend to lead to simplistic answers. A second approach within the literature attempts a more sophisticated analysis, exploring the relationship of fashion to modernity'. While broad in scope, these theoretical approaches do not provide an account of how fashion is experienced and practised in everyday dress. They provide a theoretical account of fashion which results in the neglect of dress as practice. They also often fail to address they way in which fashion is intimately connected to the body, treating fashion as a social and communicative phenomenon but not a phenomenon of the body. The· third approach is less concerned with theoretical explanations than with examining specific dress practices in a culture. This concern with practice can be found in some recent anthropological literature (Barnes and Eicher 1992, Freeman 1993, Hoodfar 1991, Weiner and Schnieder 1991), which examines the cultural significance, meanings and practices around adornment, as well as in social psychology (Cash 1985, Ericksen and Joseph 1985, Tseëlon 1992a, 1997), which looks at what people do and mean by their dress in daily life. However, they are of limited value to an account of fashion in the west. ## Theoretical Approaches I: 'Why' Questions and their Answers Early explanations of dress and fashion, and indeed many contemporary accounts, have tended to start from ‘why’ questions: why do we wear clothes? They may also ask questions about the nature of fashion: why a fashion system based on continual change?; why do fashions change as they do?; why the difference between men's and women's fashions? An examination of these why'questions is quite revealing of the ways in which fashion has been theorized and can also demonstrate how thinking on fashion has tended to be reductive, producing a theory of dress or fashion which is simplistic in its attempt to be all-inclusive. The net result of such‘why'questions is the reduction of fashion to simple causes and effects and to overly deterministic and reductive accounts. ## Theoretical explanations of dress and adornment In answer to the question why do we adorn?, anthropology has come up with a number of different explanations: protection, modesty, display and communication, each one being progressively more inclusive than the former. Barnard (1996), Polhemus and Proctor (1978) and also Rouse (1989) give good summaries of these different approaches and begin by noting the early influence of the late nineteenth-century anthropologist Malinowski who posed the narrower question, why do we wear clothes? One answer is that human beings have basic needs, one of the most fundamental of which is to protect the body from the elements. However, this theory is problematic: in some cultures people do not wear clothes and indeed, as Rouse (1989) notes, many are able to survive in extreme temperatures without much protection from clothes. This is true of clothes in the west as well as in non-western cultures: skimpy clothes, for example, are worn for the sake of fashion, often regardless of freezing temperatures. Polhemus and Proctor (1978) and Rouse (1989) therefore note that this explanation ignores the fact that many styles of dress both in the west and in traditional and non-western cultures are not practical and often cause bodily discomfort. The second explanation that has been put forward is that of modesty: clothes are worn in order to cover the sexual organs. However, anthropological evidence suggests that there is no universal notion of modesty but a high degree of cultural variability, making modesty problematic as a founding principle. As Rouse (1989) notes, modesty and shame are relative to social context. Psychological literature has also asked why we wear clothes and has sought to explain the fact in terms of psychological processes. Flügel's work (1930) in this area constitutes the classic text. He does not reject the two theories of protection and modesty, but proposes that a third might be of more significance, that is the purpose of decoration and display. Clothes are worn not to reduce sexual messages but to make us more sexually attractive. Adapting Freud's psychoanalytic approach, he goes on to suggest that clothes express two contradictory tendencies, that of modesty and exhibition, and also argues that clothes themselves (such as the male necktie) may symbolize the sex organs. In this way, clothes express an ambivalence and this leads him to suggest that the use of clothes seems, in its psychological aspects, to resemble the process whereby a neurotic symptom is developed’(Flügel 1930: 20). Clothes, for Flügel, constitute ‘a perpetual blush upon the surface of humanity'(1930: 21). A fourth explanation for adornment, that it stems from a universal human propensity to communicate with symbols, has become a dominant theoretical framework, accepted by anthropologists on dress as well as by theorists concerned specifically with fashion. Given its dominance, this explanation of fashion/dress as communication is discussed in more detail below, but first I examine some of the theories put forward to explain fashion. ## Theoretical explanations of fashion There are numerous fashion histories which attempt to find a theoretical explanation of fashion. This literature seeks to explain fashion as a unique system of dress and to understand why such a system exists at all, perhaps also addressing the question of why fashions change the way they do. This propensity to ask ‘why' questions of fashion is evident in the now classic Theory of the Leisure Class, by the late nineteenth-century sociologist Thorstein Veblen, first published in 1899 and reissued 1953. Implicit in his theory of fashion are two why questions, the first of which is: why a fashion system at all? His answer is one that needs to be historicized, since it could be argued that it tells us more about fashion at the end of the nineteenth century than about the meanings of fashion today. Veblen explains fashion in terms of the characteristics he argues are particular to the leisure class, the new bourgeois class who, he argues, adopt fashion as a tool in the battle for social status. The newly emerging bourgeoisie expresses its wealth through conspicuous consumption, conspicuous waste and conspicuous leisure. Since fashion has no utility, members of this class adopt it as a means to show their distance from function: only the rich and leisured can afford to discard clothes before they are worn out. Dress is a supreme example of the expression of pecuniary culture, since ‘our apparel is always in evidence and affords an indication of our pecuniary standing to all observers at the first glance'(Veblen 1953: 119). The second question asked by Veblen is: why do fashions relentlessly change? He suggests that the need for conspicuous consumption and waste may explain the need for fashion to keep changing. However, this alone is not enough, since it leaves unexplained not only the motive for making and accepting changes in style, but why conformity to fashion is necessary. Instead, he goes on to argue that wastefulness is innately offensive, and this makes the futility and expense of fashion abhorrent and ugly. He therefore suggests that the movement of fashion and its being followed by people can be explained as our attempt to escape the futility and ugliness of fashion, with each new style welcomed as relief from the previous aberration until that, too, in all its futility and wastefulness, is also rejected. According to Veblen, women's dress displays these dynamics more than men's since the only role of the bourgeois lady of the house is to demonstrate her master's ability to pay, his pecuniary strength to remove her entirely from the sphere of work. Veblen's account of the leisure class constructs the bourgeois woman as servile (he compares her role with that of domestic servants); they are passive beings or‘men's chattel’ and the clothes they wear are indicative of this. Women's dress was closely linked to fashion and therefore was an important means by which the bourgeois class could conspicuously consume and be fashionably wasteful. The Victorian woman's dress was also an important indicator of vicarious leisure. The bourgeois lady wore clothes that made her obviously incapable of work - elaborate bonnets, heavy skirts, delicate shoes and constraining corsets - testimony to her distance from productive work and of her consumption of leisure. Veblen condemns these traits of fashionable dress and calls for dress which is based on rational, utilitarian principals reminiscent of the principals of many dress reformers (see Newton 1974 for a summary). There are a number of problems with Veblen's theory. His account of fashion and fashion change relies on the idea of emulation (the limitations of which are examined in more detail below and in chapter 3). His analysis of the bourgeois woman lacks any sense of agency: fashion is conceived of as an over-determining and negative force in the life of the Victorian woman. Both Kunzle (1982) and Steele (1985) offer a rather different view of the Victorian woman's relationship to fashion and revise the standard fashion story of the corset as oppressive to women (Veblen 1953, Roberts 1977). Steele's account sets out to consider the role of erotic display in fashion, arguing that the traditional image of the Victorian woman as sexually and socially repressed 'needs to be radically revised' (1985: 3). Instead, she posits the view that 'Victorian fashions revolved around an ideal of feminine beauty in which eroticism played an important part'(1985: 3) and in this way there is more continuity between the nineteenth and twentieth centuries than previously thought. Kunzle (1982) goes further than this, arguing that the wearing of the corset by the Victorian woman was not a sign of her servile status, but that instead the female tight-lacer was a sexually and socially assertive woman. Both Kunzle and Steele see the Victorian woman as an active subject and support their argument by historical evidence of what Victorian women did in their daily practice (although Steele takes issue with Kunzle's evidence of tight-lacers, taken from the correspondence of corset fetishists, which, she suggests may have exaggerated for the sake of erotic effect). It is also worth noting at this point that Veblen's account of women's relationship to dress, if ever appropriate, is now significantly out of date. As I have argued elsewhere (Entwistle 1997a, 1997b) the entry of women into the professions has brought with it a shift in the public/private, production/consumption dichotomy, which had women confined to the home and the realm of consumption. It also brought with it a shift in the terms operating around female dress. As a player within the productive world of work, and a wage earner in her own right, the career woman is no longer ‘man's chattel' and her dress no longer about vicarious display of leisure. The entry of women into the professional job market resulted in the emergence of dress that was not incapacitating but indeed almost ‘rational', at least in its principal aim of enabling women to get on in the world and not be encumbered by fussy and feminine dress. Despite the problems with Veblen's account it provides a good example of an early sociological study and one that is still influential today. Many of his ideas can be traced through the work of other theorists of fashion and indeed, as Wilson (1985) notes, in general Veblen's ideas have gone largely unchallenged by fashion writers. This may have something to do with the fact that he is one of the few social theorists to have treated fashion with any seriousness. One sympathetic reading of Veblen comes from the work of Bell (1976), although his analysis produces a far less negative picture of fashion and does not condemn fashion as ugly or irrational. A similar line of argument can be traced through the work of Baudrillard (1981), who argues that fashion continually fabricates the ‘beautiful’ on the basis of a radical denial of beauty, by reducing beauty to the logical equivalent of ugliness. It can impose the most eccentric, dysfunctional, ridiculous traits as eminently distinctive. This is where it triumphs – imposing and legitimating the irrational according to a logic deeper than that of rationality. (1981: 79) Wilson takes issue with Veblen's and Baudrillard's account of fashion as wasteful and futile. In condemning fashion, Veblen assumes that the world should be organized around utilitarian values; this is a world where there is no place for the irrational or the non-utilitarian; it was a wholly rational realm'(Wilson 1985: 52). A further problem with Veblen, according to Wilson, is his causal account of fashion change. His theory that fashion is constantly changing in an attempt to get away from ugliness and find beauty is reductive and overdeterministic. In his assertion of utility in dress, Veblen attempts to ‘explain away'fashion as essentially useless, unnecessary and irrational, thus failing to acknowledge its ambivalent and contradictory nature as well as the pleasures it affords. The same is true of Baudrillard, whose account, according to Wilson, is 'over simplified and over-deterministic' in that, he, like Veblen, ‘grants no role to contradiction, nor for that matter to pleasure' (1985: 53). Moreover, Baudrillard's attack on consumption per se is ultimately nihilistic, producing an account of individuals as caught up in a ‘seamless web of oppression'(1985: 53). The problem of causality is one that dogs several other classic accounts of fashion and dress. A number of theorists begin by asking why questions: why does such a seemingly irrational' system of dress exist and why do fashions change in the way they do? Many theories have developed to explain fashion's dynamics in terms of a logic inherent to the fashion system. Three theories in particular have become quite influential as explanatory frameworks: the theory of emulation or ‘trickle-down'; the theory of Zeitgeist; and the theory of 'the shifting erogenous zone'. All three attempt to explain fashion by reference to a singular force and are highly problematic, in that in seeking to find the causes'of fashion, they tend to be reductive and mechanistic. Veblen (1953) and Simmel (1971) are the most famous proponents of the theory of fashion as emulation, according to which styles start at the top of the social hierarchy with an elite class opting for a distinctive style of dress; the classes below, seeking to emulate the status of this class, gradually adopt the style and fashion thus trickles down'. By the time a particular style has been adopted by the working class, the elite, in order to maintain their distinction and status, have moved on to another style, thus fashions continually shift. Georg Simmel (1971) argues that fashion expresses a tension between uniformity and differentiation: it expresses the contradictory desire to fit in and connect with a group, and simultaneously to stand out and assert an individual identity. According to Simmel, adopting extreme and new styles of dress is one means by which the elite differentiate themselves from the rest but, given their high social status, the things they choose to wear become desirable and are copied by the social class below them in an attempt to emulate their status. Once the style has ‘trickled down' to the lower classes, it can no longer serve to differentiate the 'leading edge' elite who have to move on to adopt another, often more extreme style to maintain their status position. This oscillating rhýthm produces fashion with its logic of constant innovation. Emulation has come under attack by a number of theorists (Campbell 1989, Partington 1992, Polhemus 1994, Wilson 1985). Rouse (1989) outlines three main criticisms of this approach: first, change does not occur because the lower classes begin to wear the clothes of the rich; second, there have been occasions when fashions from working-class and other low-status groups such as black youth have become influential; and third, that the trickle-down' theory is dependent upon a time lag between styles worn by the rich being adopted by the lower classes, which, given today's production turnover, is no longer the case. Partington (1992) attacks emulation more radically in her account of working-class women and Dior's 'New Look'. She suggests that working-class women did not emulate this look but adapted it in their own way, which was not a ‘watered down' or less creative version of the ‘real' thing. McCracken (1985) has attempted to re-evaluate the emulation model, updating it by examining power relations between the genders. His account looks at the professional and business woman's emulation of the male business suit at work. He argues that this new breed of professional woman wanted the same status as men at work and, in order to achieve it, emulated the suited look long established as the uniform of men in business. However, in order to develop this argument, he has to ‘prove' that the dominant group (i.e. men) is now altering its style as more women start to wear the suit. This seems patently not the case: McCraken provides little evidence to substantiate this point. The main issue, however, is that emulation as a model for explaining dress is too mechanistic and too simplistic. (Further discussions of emulation and its problems are offered in chapters 3 and 7.) The question of why fashion changes as it does is answered by some authors with reference to Zeitgeist (e.g. Ditcher 1985). This approach argues that fashion responds to social and political changes. It is an explanation of style that has become part of everyday 'folklore', evident in the commonly cited idea that hemlines drop during economic depressions, as was the case in the 1930s, and rise in times of economic boom, as in the 1960s. Wars are given great importance in this approach. During the First World War, for example, women went out to work in greater numbers than before, and it is assumed that this resulted in the abandoning of the corset and the long hobble skirts of the preceding period; and it is in terms of this explanatory framework that commentators interpret Dior's New Look' as part of the 1950s move to make women more feminine and decorative after the masculinizing influence of the Second World War. However, there are numerous problems with this approach, one being that it tends to over-simplify fashion: as Wilson notes, ‘such statements are too obvious to be entirely true, and the history they misrepresent is more complex'(1985: 46). The 'New Look' can in fact be traced back to before the outbreak of the Second World War: Bell (1976), for example, argues that Vivien Leigh's dresses in the film of Gone with the Wind (1939) anticipated Dior's post-war look. The quantitative study of women's fashions from the 1600s to the 1930s conducted by Richardson and Kroeber (1973) is perhaps the most exhaustive attempt to correlate fashion change with social change. In examining fashion plates of over three centuries, they could not find any conclusive evidence to suggest that social changes influenced any particular dimension of the female silhouette. Instead, as Bell suggests, dress often fails to mirror social climate: while some connections might be established for some of the time, the connection is 'not one of mechanical causality' (1976: 102). If we try to pin changes down to political and social movements, we will always find exceptions to the rule because fashion cuts both ways. Bell also goes on to say that if we allow Zeitgeist theory a free hand it becomes almost a supernatural hypothesis, one of metaphysical rather than social proportions. A third strand in answering the question of why fashions change as they do focuses on attempts to explain why women's fashions change so rapidly. Laver (1969, 1995) argues that there is a single rule governing women's fashions, namely the ‘seduction principle': women's dress is primarily about the enhancement of their sexual attractiveness to men. On the other hand, men's dress does not change as rapidly as women's and is governed instead by the 'hierarchical principle': it is about the enhancement of their social status. The rapidity of change in women's fashions is explained by Laver through the theory of the 'shifting erogenous zone'. At different times, women's clothes display a particular part of the female body but, in order to keep men's desire, the emphasis must continually shift. Thus, for example, he argues that men became tired of the emphasis on female legs in the 1920s so shifted attention to the female back in the 1930s, hence causing a shift in women's fashions. As a number of authors testify (Bell 1976, Hollander 1994, Polhemus and Proctor 1978, Rouse 1989, Steele 1985, 1996, Wilson 1985), there is a definite link between dress and eroticism. Wilson, for example, argues that ‘it seems so obvious that dress must bear some relationship to sexuality that the assumption goes virtually unquestioned'(1985: 91). Even in societies where few clothes are worn, it is common to dress up for ceremonies in ways that serve to enhance sexual appeal. Fetishistic dress, as I demonstrate in chapter 6, is also testimony to the power of clothes to incite sexual desire and indeed in the west many items of clothing, for example corsets, and such fabrics as leather and rubber have become closely associated with sex (Kunzle 1982, Wilson 1985, Polhemus 1994, Steele 1985, 1996). However, while there is an undoubted link between dress and sexuality, Laver's account (1969), which places eroticism as the prime mover of women's fashions, is inadequate. As Wilson argues, it is very difficult to determine what erogenous zone clothes display: trousers might reveal the leg or the bottom', for example? (1985: 92). She also suggests that there are a number of instances of women's dress, such as their dress for work, which seeks to 'muffle' sexuality, not enhance it, demonstrating that eroticism and display do not explain all fashion. Polhemus and Proctor (1978) also suggest that the theory of erotic attraction cannot take account of many styles of dress which are not erotic. For example, it fails to explain the fashion for combat trousers for women in the late 1990s; these garments seem to be neither obviously erotic nor particularly revealing of the body. Problems with why'explanations Among the problems with historical accounts and theories that take‘why’questions as their startingpoint is the fact that the literature is over-simplistic and methodologically naive. It tells stories of fashion as a self-evident, unfolding narrative of change explained by a single motivating force: status competition (Veblen 1953); ‘the shifting erogenous zone’(Laver 1969); the ‘neurotic impulse' or ‘perpetual blush on the face of humanity' (Flügel 1930). This kind of theory results in the organization of fashion history in terms of narratives that are unilinear and reductive. A further problem is that, more often than not, fashion is depicted as ugly’and irrational’or indeed trivial and vain, thus producing theories that are heavily moralistic. Since fashion literature traditionally tends to focus on women, these macro-theories have therefore often produced simplistic, moralizing and patronizing accounts of women's involvement in dress: for example, Laver's account (1969) produces women as passive victims of the ‘male gaze'(Mulvey 1975); Veblen's account of women's relationship to fashion constructs them as ‘exquisite slaves’and victims to the irrationality of fashion. However, perhaps a more general and fundamental problem with all'these ‘why'questions is that they result in macro-theory which attempts to explain the fashion system in an all-inclusive way. As demonstrated above, each theory has its limitations primarily because each attempts to find an all-inclusive explanation of adornment or fashion. This kind of approach to dress and the fashion system reduces to singular cause and effect what is actually a complex phenomenon. The literature fails to recognize fashion as a socially constituted practice which cannot be understood in isolation but as part of a wide range of other social forces, in particular class, race and gender. Moreover, the 'why' approaches with their propensity to over-generalize, fail to give an account of agency on the part of women and men. There is no account of dress practice: the theorist sits at a distance, interpreting fashion without seeking to grasp the meanings given to it in daily life or indeed the ways in which it is transformed and resisted by people in practice. In contrast to these theories, the argument put forward here is that dress needs to be understood as a situated practice that is the result of complex social forces and individual negotiations in daily life. An approach to dress which adopts the framework of situated practice opposes crude reductionism and rejects any attempt to isolate fashion as an all-powerful and determining force. Instead, the fashion system sets parameters around dress but within these parameters are many practices of dressing that are dependent upon a variety of other social structures. A consideration of dress from this perspective involves investigating experiences and practical understandings of fashion as well as the factors which mediate it. It would counteract the tendency to make generalizations about all dress which ‘grand theory'tends to do. Dress and fashion as communication This discussion has so far examined the problems associated with many of the universal explanations of adornment from anthropology, as well as the limitations of a number of classic accounts attempting to explain the specific dynamics of the fashion system. However, as indicated above, one explanation of all forms of adornment, traditional and modern, is that they stem from the human propensity to communicate through symbols. The idea that humans share a fundamental need to communicate has now become widely accepted as the dominant explanatory framework among anthropologists of dress and theorists of fashion. Anthropology has provided evidence to indicate that all human societies modify the body through some form of adornment and that this, along with language, is posited as a universal propensity. The idea that dress is communicative is adopted by theorists such as Barnard (1996), Davis (1992), Lurie (1981), Polhemus and Proctor (1978), Rouse (1989) and Wilson (1985) and used to explain the purpose of fashion in modern societies. This explanation is more fruitful than other theories for dress, adornment and fashion: clothes and other adornments may be worn for instrumental purposes or for protection but they are also part of the expressive culture of a community. It follows that if clothes are expressive or communicative aspects of human culture, then they must be meaningful in some way. One clearly discernible approach to the issue of meaning in fashion/ dress has emerged from structuralism and semiotics, as has a more nebulous body of work that explores the communicative aspects of fashion and consumption within modernity and postmodernity. The latter ranges from historical works that examine the emergence of fashion and the role played by fashion in modernity to accounts of the significance of fashion in late modern life, an approach which focuses particular attention on the role of fashion in the construction of identity. One example of the approach to fashion as communication draws analogies between fashion and language, considering the way in which fashion operates like a language'. The language-like nature of fashion and dress is considered by such theorists as Davis (1992), Polhemus and Proctor (1978) and Rouse (1989) but is carried to extremes in the work of Lurie (1981). She suggests that fashion has a grammar' and a ‘vocabulary' like spoken languages, with dress being theoretically larger than verbal language, extending to hairstyle, the way the body is held, how it walks and so on. There are sartorial equivalents of ‘anarchic words', taboos (e.g. dresses for men) and ‘slang words'(e.g. jeans), while accessories like earrings and hats can be compared to adjectives. There are a number of problems with this direct application of language models to fashion. Davis (1992) suggests that clothing can be thought of like a language but suggests that the more ambiguous language of music is better suited to capturing the equally ambiguous nature of clothes. He therefore argues that the idea of language should be applied to fashion metaphorically and not literally, and goes on to suggest that the idea of a code is particularly useful: a code is ‘the binding ligament in the shared understandings that comprise a sphere of discourse and, hence, its associated social arrangements'(1992: 5). There are social codes of dress but these are very context bound, and there is no equivalent to a sentence in dress and no way that dress can give as precise a message as a spoken sentence. Clothes, then, for Davis are meaningful but their meanings are ambiguous and imprecise. Their real power comes from their ability to suggest, evoke and resist a fixed meaning. Tseëlon (1997) also demonstrates the ambiguity of clothes. Having asked a group of women to come to a focus group dressed in a way that ‘expresses who they are', she compared the intentions of the women with the interpretation made of them by others: the result was considerable misunderstanding and misinterpretation. It would seem, therefore, that if the meanings of dress are not as clear or precise as verbal language, Lurie's analogy becomes untenable. This inability of clothes to be read' effectively is noted by Campbell (1997), who criticizes the very premise that fashionable dress is communicative. He suggests that the considerable misunderstanding involved in reading the dress of others reflects the difficulty of fixing any meaning to clothes. However, while the direct application of language models to fashion is problematic, the structuralist model and its method, borrowed from the structural linguistics of Ferdinand de Saussure, has become a dominant framework for considering fashion, particularly within cultural studies. Structuralism is interested in meaning and how meaning in communication systems is possible. Saussure proposed that signs gain their meaning not from anything intrinsic to them, but from their ability to stand in for things. The sign comprises two elements, the signifier (i.e. the sound or image of the sign) and the signified (i.e. the concept associated with it). Signs gain their identity from one another through their difference to other signs, and meaning (in language or any other sign system) comes from the way in which signs combine with other signs. While Saussure developed his theory in relation to language, he saw the potential of his approach for the study of all signs systems and prophesied that a 'science of signs', which he called semiology, would develop. Such a ‘science' would provide a method for understanding meaning in all communicative practices, including dress. Semiotics draws upon Saussure's system of language but moves from looking at written communication to non-verbal phenomena. The focus of semiotic accounts has been to explain fashion as a system rather than everyday dress, and to address fashion texts rather than practices. The reasons for this focus of attention are purely methodological. Roland Barthes, who played an influential role in establishing semiology (or semiotics), provides a classic structuralist account of fashion in The Fashion System, (1985) and demonstrates very clearly the structuralist's methodological concerns. Barthes recounts his decision to focus on the written fashion text, as opposed to its visual representation or the real garments worn, in his search 'to reconstitute step by step a system of meaning, in a more or less immediate manner'(1985: x). He says it is the structural purity' of the fashion text that governed his choice: real clothing and its representation are burdened with practical problems but the magazine's text offers the best possibility of studying a slice of fashion at a given moment: only written clothing has no practical or aesthetic function: it is entirely constituted with a view to a signification: if the magazine describes a certain article of clothing verbally, it does so solely to convey a message whose content is: Fashion; . . . written clothing is unencumbered by any parasitic function and entails no vague temporality. (1985: 8) Barthes therefore recognizes the limitations of this choice in terms of a sociology of fashion, suggesting that an analysis which looks only at the written system may disappoint sociologists because it does not deal with fashion as an institution and may indeed tell us only about semiology. The structuralist approach as Barthes develops it effectively ‘brackets off’ other equally important aspects of the fashion system, such as its industrial and commercial aspects, as well as how it is incorporated into everyday practices of dress. The structuralist approach, governed by methodological concerns, is thus propelled towards texts rather than practices. The ‘structural purity’ of the text comes from its being a ‘frozen' or ‘static' moment, whereas social action is complex and dynamic and difficult to capture. As Barthes' account testifies, it is much easier to study a slice of text than it is to study the complex mechanisms of an industry such as the fashion industry, or the complex and nebulous negotiations which make-up everyday dress practices. The relative ease of the structuralist method, which can indeed be done from the armchair, makes it a popular choice with theorists. Fashion literature of this ilk has focused on ‘reading' photographs, magazines and advertisements as texts. Evans and Thornton (1989), for example, attempt to re-evaluate theories of female narcissism and theories of masquerade through women's magazines and fashion photographs. In one chapter they analyse six fashion photographs and proceed to analyse semiotically the internal arrangement of the elements in the photograph. In a similar vein, Brooks (1989) analyses the way in which Helmut Newton orchestrates ‘the look' within his fashion photographs. Moving beyond semiotics, Nixon (1996) draws on psychoanalysis and Foucauldian post-structural analysis (as well as empirical work on marketing and advertising practices) to examine the organization of the look in style magazines for men, focusing in particular on fashion photography and the various representations of the ‘new man'popularized in the 1980s. In his analysis of youth subcultures, Dick Hebdige (1979) draws directly upon the Saussurian tradition in order to talk about the signs' adopted by the subculture to create meaning within, and give identity to, the group. His semiotic analysis moves from written texts as in Barthes'analysis to the uses of objects by youth subcultures. Hebdige uses this concept to suggest that subcultures ‘steal' or appropriate' objects from mainstream culture but in doing so inflect' them with their own meaning. A humble object such as a safety pin with its associated domestic meanings is inflected with subversive and aggressive meanings when worn through the nose of a punk. In this way, Hebdige gives an account of the meaningful role played by ‘style' within youth subculture. Although Hebdige's account focuses not on fashion texts but ‘real'garments and their uses within social groups, this account of style remains a structuralist one by virtue of its methodological approach. Hebdige textualizes subcultural dress practice: he reads the body/style of the subculture as if it were a text. Such textualism makes no distinction between reading a fashion magazine and reading the body of a punk or a mod. This ability to textualize everything serves to 'bracket off' real live bodies as they are lived and experienced. The structuralist method, in seeking to find the relations between elements in a structure, puts a distance between the theorist and the subjects under investigation, since semiotic analysis can be done in the armchair or office and does not require entering the field of action itself (Bourdieu 1989). This ‘bracketing off' of the world beyond the text is a deliberate epistemological and methodological stance taken by structuralists, who claim that we cannot know the world beyond its representations. This stance effectively displaces the idea of embodiment and the individual and can give us no account of experience or agency. It can therefore tell us nothing about what sense people make of fashion, what pleasures it affords, or how fashion structures the experience of dress and the clothing decisions made in everyday life. There is a further problem with this method as with other studies of fashion which focus on texts, and that has to do with the position of the theorist who, in ‘reading' representations remains at a distance from actual practices. In his critique of structuralism, Bourdieu (1989, 1994) argues that structuralism maintains a position of distance from the world but assumes a position of superiority; the implicit claim of the structuralist is that he or she knows more, has greater understanding and insight, than those they observe. Thus, Hebdige's work on subcultures does not give us an account of what people do and mean by their dress: his analysis does not consider what subcultural participants say about their dress. Instead we are offered Hebdige's interpretation of their dress and what it means. The structuralist reading assumes that there is an objective meaning that can be discerned from the surface and which the method of structural analysis can unlock. Structuralism, however, is not entirely responsible for this focus on texts. Contributions to the study of fashion within art history and film theory have been equally concerned with texts rather than practices. Gaines and Herzog (1990) explore the meaning of the dressed body in texts, mainly film texts, while Hollander (1993) explores ‘how clothes in works of art have been connected with clothes in real life (1993: xi). Hollander suggests that the formal qualities of art are important in illuminating the way in which clothes should be worn and how the body should look in them: so much so that ‘the way clothes strike the eye comes to be mediated by current visual assumptions made from pictures of dressed people'(1993: xi). However, while Hollander's focus on art to illuminate dress, although not unusual (it is the standard approach within art/costume history) is problematic because she extends her analysis of the representations to suggest how these representations may have influenced the way clothes and nakedness are perceived in general. Bell (1976), for example, advises caution in relying on paintings and fashion plates, since the painter might have exaggerated the dress, and the person depicted might have chosen to wear particularly elaborate dress for the purpose of the painting. Paintings therefore do not necessarily tell us what dress would have been worn in everyday life. It is also problematic because the clothes depicted in art tend to be the clothes of the elite, not those of ordinary people'. For this reason, de la Haye (1988) and Taylor and Wilson (1989) focus not on paintings but on other sorts of representation in order to examine fashions through the ages. A further problem with focusing on art images, or indeed any image, is noted by both McDowell (1992) and Bell (1976), who argue that visual information is just one part of clothing: what we lack in these historical records is the sensual sound and feel of clothes. Hollander's claim that the clothed figure looks more persuasive and comprehensible in art than it does in reality'(1993: xi) points to a methodologically driven quest not unlike Barthes’ desire to investigate the workings of the fashion system by looking at fashion journalism. The body in art might present a static, tidy, more comprehensive' image than in reality and might therefore be easier to study. However, clothes in everyday life are not like art, nor do they pretend to be: clothes in everyday life take on the form of the body and in doing so get crumpled, creased, ripped and so on. Textual approaches therefore do not tell us of the many other aspects of fashion and dress. I do not wish to suggest that these textual approaches are in themselves invalid since they serve the purpose of illuminating the way in which clothes are represented, albeit in idealized form. However, what is problematic is the dominance of approaches which focus on texts to the exclusion of other issues concerning fashion and dress, as well as the tendency to extend the analysis of texts beyond the text itself, as Hollander (1993) does. By textualizing fashion and dress these approaches can sometimes be reductive; if practices are reduced to texts, the complexity of fashion and dress and the way in which it is embodied is largely neglected. Studies of fashion and dress in terms of how they are lived and experienced are equally valid but have found little place within historical or contemporary literature. The study of fashion/dress as situated bodily practice moves away from looking solely at texts, although such structuring influences as paintings and fashion magazines are not to be ignored. It looks at how people take account of their involvement with fashion and the way they dress in particular social situations. A concern with subjective accounts necessitates a move into the ‘field' of action itself rather than maintaining a position of distance occupied by structuralism. The notion of situated bodily practice also recognizes dress as an experience of embodiment and the outcome of practical actions taken by individuals on their bodies. ## Theoretical Approaches Il: Fashion and the Condition of Modern Life Another body of literature on fashion has emerged which examines its communicative abilities and its role in modern and late or postmodern life. The works of Finkelstein (1991), Giddens (1991), Sennett (1977), Simmel (1971) and Wilson (1985, 1992) have all attempted to understand fashion as an integral aspect of modernity and/or postmodernity. While these approaches are discussed in detail in chapters 3 and 4, it is worth noting some important points about this literature here. There are a number of themes which unite these accounts: they focus on the nature of identity under conditions of rapid change, exploring the resources for the self that modernity opens up in order to cope with these changes and examining the role played by dress in the presentation of the self on the modern social stage. These accounts deal with sociological concerns in that they examine the fashion system not from the point of view of human psychology, or from the idea of disembodied sign systems, but examine the social forces at work within a system of dress and situate fashion within the context of the development of modernity. Wilson makes a strong case for considering fashion in terms of modernity in Adorned in Dreams (1985). She is critical of the various theories put forward to explain fashion (èmulation, Zeitgeist, fashion as language, psychoanalysis and so on) as generally reductive, missing 'fashion's purposive and creative aspects', its 'tantalising and slippery essence' (1985: 58). She proposes instead that the concepts of ‘modernism' and ‘modernity' capture this essence. Fashion, she suggests, has an affinity with modern art and a number of fashion designers have purposively borrowed from modern art. The concept of modernity is mobilized because it ‘seems useful as a way of indicating the restless desire for change characteristic of cultural life in industrial capitalism, the desire for the new that fashion expresses so well' (1985: 63). Fashion is also part of the modern experience because it is central to the experience of the modern city; dress is one ‘technique of survival' in a metropolis that brings one into contact with strangers. The theme of display and self-presentation in the city is also central to Richard Sennett's analysis of The Fall of Public Man (1977). In his account, the development of the bourgeoisie and the increasing separation of public and private that ensued during the late eighteenth and nineteenth century have eroded the public life of the individual. Over the course of the eighteenth century and with the rise of Romanticism, the public sphere was eroded by the intrusion of the private sphere and this was coupled with the injunction to be authentic' in public. This can be traced through the kinds of dress worn at the time. Up until around the mid-eighteenth century, appearance was not seen to express the self, but instead to be a performance ‘at a distance from the self'. The eighteenth-century aristocratic figure, both male and female, would have worn highly elaborate dress, heavy make-up and flamboyant wigs but this striking impression did not attempt to present the individuality of the person. The elaborate dress would set the body (and thus the identity) of the wearer at a distance as ‘costume' does in the theatre: the body was a mannequin'. Appearance was all about play and performance and this enabled individuals to live fully in the public world. However, as Romanticism took hold, challenging artifice and celebrating natural' and ‘authentic' man, the sense that dress and appearance should be related to one's identity emerged. The modern individual, then, is one who is aware of being read by his or her appearance (as discussed in chapter 4). This theme is also pursued by Joanne Finkelstein (1991). Like Sennett, she is interested in the development of ‘authenticating narratives' that link one's appearance with identity. While the physiognomic theories popular in the nineteenth century might now seem quaint, Finkelstein argues that they have not disappeared: the common form they take is reading people by reference to their body, dress and overall appearance. Given that people are aware of the significance given to their appearance, more and more are choosing to manipulate it through cosmetic surgery or dress; it is also true that we are increasingly aware that appearance can be inauthentic' or artificial. The modern world, says Finkelstein, is thus a strangely contradictory one. As I argue in chapters 3 and 4, increasing importance has been attached to the body and this can be traced back much earlier than the eighteenth century and could be deemed part of a longer civilizing process'. Elias (1978) points to the way in which the body became a site for marking out status and distinction in European court societies. In the court, social roles and status were indicated by the degree of bodily control, good manners and gentility exhibited, and knights could rise or fall on the degree to which they managed their bodies and maintained acivilized' appearance. Elias maintains that this civilizing process is never ending. It could be argued that the processes identified by him are the pre-history to Sennett's and Finkelstein's analysis of the different emphases placed upon bodily appearance in the seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. In contemporary society, not only are bodies bearers of status and distinction, as Bourdieu (1984) points out, but the body has increasingly come to be seen as the container of the self, signifying 'individuality' and ‘authenticity'. Featherstone (1991b) catalogues the social and cultural changes that have brought about the performing self', which he argues emerged in the early twentieth century. He examines the extension of new forms of representation into everyday life, in particular photography and Hollywood films, arguing that these have, along with the cosmetics industry, placed increasing attention on bodily appearance and health, youth and beauty. According to Featherstone, this has brought about a modern self that is acutely interested in how it appears to others; appearance has become important in the pursuit of happiness and fulfilment. Shilling (1993) pursues a similar theme when he talks about the emergence of a number of 'body projects' in the late twentieth century, such as dieting and body building, which attempt to gain control over the appearance of the body and which are thought to enhance one's ability to achieve greater personal satisfaction out of life. Another attempt to understand the nature of modernity and its impact upon the self centres on one important aspect of modernity noted by Bauman (1991), Davis (1992), Finkelstein (1991) and Giddens (1991), namely, ambivalence. The modern or postmodern world is a social maelstrom characterized by a loss of certainty, a world where ‘all that is solid melts into air'(Berman 1983). For the modern self, this fragmentation results in anxiety and a crisis in identity, although not all individuals experience the modern as threatening or alienating. It is in such a world that fashion opens up possibilities for framing the self, at least momentarily, since fashion is always moving, never stable. As Davis (1992) argues, fashion provides symbols, however ephemeral, for fixing identity while simultaneously playing with the instability of identity. Baudelaire's flâneur (Baudelaire 1986; see also Benjamin 1989) and the dandy are examples of the modern self (discussed in chapter 4) who exploit the freedoms of the city and traverses its avenues and boulevards to see and be seen. However, clothing in the modern world is deployed to deal with the ambivalence although, as Davis (1992) argues, fashion does not produce permanent symbolic solutions, only temporary ones. The way in which identity is the site for work is a theme explored in the work of Giddens (1991) and Beck (1992). Although they do not deal specifically with dress, both posit the idea that modern identity has become a 'reflexive project'. The modern self is increasingly aware of itself, including its appearance, and able to intervene and act upon it. These theories of modernity are insightful, offering accounts of how identity in contemporary society is constructed. They are particularly useful for understanding how fashion develops as a technique of dressing, employed self-consciously to construct an identity suitable for the modern stage. This literature on fashion and modernity is of considerable value in terms of understanding and historicizing practices of dress today. However, one problem is its failure to ground these ideas in empirical work on practices of the self. Tseëlon (1997) is one notable exception to the theoreticist tendency. She attempts not only to interpret the ways in which femininity has been constructed in Christian and other texts, for example but has also explored the way in which these ideas have framed women's understandings of their appearance and impacted upon their strategies of dress. She has therefore stepped into the field itself, interviewing women about their self-presentation and clothing choices, and therefore comes closest to understanding dress as situated practice'. ## Empirical Approaches The two broad theoretical approaches examined above tend to theorize but not to investigate dress in everyday life empirically. The two bodies of literature that have conducted empirical work on practices surrounding dress are anthropology and social psychology. The ethnographic approach adopted by anthropology has resulted in detailed and grounded accounts of the meanings and practices of dress within particular cultural contexts. For example, work has been conducted on the construction of gender among the British community in colonial India (Callaway 1992), the meanings surrounding maternity wear (Bailey 1992), the meanings given to cloth in different cultures (Weiner and Schnieder 1991), and the practices of veiling in Egypt by women white-collar workers (Hoodfar 1991). These studies all pay close attention to the culturally specific meanings and practices of dress within a particular context. Hoodfar, for example, shows how veiling practice in Iran is very different from that of women in Egypt, demonstrating the complexity of this practice. While it would be inappropriate to generalize across all these studies, since their value comes precisely from the fact that they deal with the specificities of dress in different contexts, one thing they do share is an interest in the local practices surrounding dress. These accounts are quite different from structuralist accounts of fashion in that they are concerned with the meanings of dress as they are understood and lived by a group. Unlike the semiotician, the ethnographic researcher does not stand outside or at a distance, but builds up a picture of dress practice from observation and engagement. Since they are accounts of dress practices in nonwestern cultures, however, they are not intended to contribute to the understanding of dress in the west. For this, one has to look to social psychology, where some detailed studies have been carried out. Social psychology is interested in dress in terms of how it is utilized by the individual and what role it plays in interpersonal communication. Tseëlon (1997), for example, is concerned with how individual women dress and explores the constraints on their choices. There is also a small body of literature on the issues at stake in female professional dress. Two studies on female professional dress are brought together in a collection edited by Soloman (1985): Cash (1985) and Ericksen and Joseph (1985). These studies adopt a (rather crude) methodological framework of hypothesis testing, starting with a particular problem' or question. For Cash the problem is 'the impact of grooming style on the evaluation of women in management'; for Ericksen and Joseph it is ‘achievement motivation and clothing preferences of white collar working women'. Ericksen and Joseph propose that ‘achievement motivated white collar working women wear business like costumes more than their non-achievement motivated counterparts'(1985: 357) and this hypothesis is then tested by largescale questionnaire-based surveys and the testing of images of women in different kinds of outfit. Such psychological studies are, however, highly problematic. The framework of hypothesis testing is flawed: the methods are naive and there is no critical reflection upon the methodology, which is taken to gain access unproblematically to the 'truth' of female white-collar dress. Such accounts are also flawed in that they do not give any account of the subjective meanings of dress. These approaches are therefore of little sociological relevance to a study of fashion and dress. This chapter has set out to examine the literature on fashion, dress and adornment and has sought to point out the strengths and weaknesses of various approaches. It has also explored the complex relationship of fashion and dress and examined how the various bodies of literature distinguish between both. I have argued that, in general, early theories of fashion and fashion change tended to be reductive and mechanistic while the literature on modernity has avoided such over-simplistic accounts, framing the role played by fashion in contemporary culture by giving a more complex account of modern society. However, these accounts tend to be theoreticist and do not address the way in which dress is lived and experienced. A further problem with much of this literature is the tendency to neglect the essentially embodied nature of dress. Wilson (1985) has acknowledged the body to some extent in her account of fashion, recognizing that dress is incomplete' without the body. However, in general, the tendency to theorize has resulted in a neglect or ‘bracketing off' of the body and embodiment. As argued in chapter 1, the body and embodiment are crucial to the understanding of fashion and dress. Fashion is an important contemporary site for discourses on the body and plays an important role in framing particular practices of dress, along with a host of other social factors. I also argue that dress is a necessary aspect of socialization and from babyhood, individuals are called upon to turn to and act upon their bodies in particular ways. Discourses on fashion and practices of dress therefore form an important component of culture, crucial to the micro-order of daily life (imagine what would happen if you walked into your local supermarket stark naked) and crucial to one's relationship with self and others. A sociology of dress as situated bodily practice aims to give an account of dress within everyday life that is not reductive or theoretically abstract, but theoretically complex and empirically grounded.