italism has been globespanning since its inception and that fluid spatial configurations of the world economy have been a common feature of the last three hundred years. The book argues also that for most of capitalism’s history the process of globalization and the needs of nationstates were not conflicting, as is often believed, but instead mutually reinforced one another. If our allegedly new global age is truly a revolutionary departure from the past, the departure is not the degree of global connection but the fact that capitalists are for the first time able to emancipate themselves from particular nation-states, the very institutions that in the past enabled their rise. As its subtitle suggests, Empire of Cotton is also part of a larger conversation among historians trying to rethink history by looking at it within a transnational, even global, spatial frame. History as a profession emerged hand in hand with the nation-state, and played an important part in its constitution. But by assuming national perspectives, historians have often underemphasized connections that transcend state borders, settling for explanations that can be drawn from events, people, and processes within particular national territories. This book is intended as a contribution to efforts to balance such “national” perspectives with a broader focus on the networks, identities, and processes that transcend political boundaries.15 By focusing on one specific commodity—cotton—and tracing how it was grown, transported, financed, manufactured, sold, and consumed, we are able to see connections between peoples and places that would remain on the margins if we embarked upon a more traditional study bounded by national borders. Instead of focusing on the history of a particular event, such as the American Civil War, or place, such as the cotton factories of Osaka, or group of people, such as West Indian slaves growing cotton, or process, such as rural cultivators turning into industrial wage workers, this book uses the biography of one product as a window into some of the most significant questions we can ask about the history of our world and to reinterpret a history of huge consequence: the history of capitalism.16 We are about to embark on a journey through five thousand years of human history. Throughout this book, we will look at a single, seemingly inconsequential item—cotton —to solve a vast mystery: Where does the modern world originate? Let’s begin by traveling to a small farming village in what is today Mexico, where cotton plants bloom in a world utterly unlike our own.
