an to have important repercussions in Europe itself. As much larger quantities of Indian cottons traveled to Europe, new markets and fashions emerged. Beautiful chintzes and muslins attracted the attention of the growing class of Europeans who had the money to purchase them and the desire to flaunt their social status by wearing them. As Indian cottons became ever more fashionable in the eighteenth century, the desire to replace these imports was a powerful incentive to ramping up cotton production in England and eventually to revolutionize it.11 Moreover, domination in Asia dovetailed with expansion into the Americas. As Spanish, Portuguese, French, English, and Dutch powers captured huge territories in the Americas, they took away the continent’s movable wealth: gold and silver. It was indeed some of these stolen precious metals that had funded the purchase of cotton fabrics in India in the first place. Eventually, however, European settlers in the Americas could not discover sufficient gold and silver and they invented a new road to wealth: plantations growing tropical and semitropical crops, sugar in particular, but also rice, tobacco, and indigo. Such plantations needed large numbers of workers, and to secure these workers, Europeans deported at first thousands and then millions of Africans to the Americas. European merchants built fortified trading stations along the western coast of Africa—Goree in present-day Senegal, Elmina in present-day Ghana, Ouidah in present-day Benin. They paid African rulers to go on a hunt for labor, exchanging captives for the products of Indian weavers. In the three centuries after 1500, more than 8 million slaves were transported from Africa to the Americas, first mostly by Spanish and Portuguese traders, to be joined in the seventeenth century by the British, French, Dutch, Danish, and others. During the eighteenth century alone, they deported more than 5 million people, mostly from west-central Africa, the Bight of Benin, the Gold Coast, and the Bight of Biafra.12 Slaves arrived almost daily on Caribbean islands, as well as along the coasts of both Americas. Such trade increased the demand for cotton fabrics, since African rulers and merchants almost always demanded cotton cloth in exchange for slaves. Although it is often imagined that the slave trade was animated by simple exchanges of guns and gewgaws for human export, slaves were more frequently traded for a far more banal commodity: cotton textiles. One study of 1,308 barters of British merchant Richard Miles between 1772 and 1780 for 2,218 Gold Coast slaves found that textiles constituted over half of the value of all traded goods. Portuguese imports to Luanda in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries tell a similar story: Woven goods constituted nearly 60 percent of imports.13 African consumers became notorious for their discerning and dynamic tastes, much to the consternation of European merchants. Indeed, one European traveler observed that African consumer tastes were “most varied and capricious,” and that “scarcely two villages concur in their canons of taste.” When the slave ship Diligent sailed from its French port in 1731, it carried in its hold a careful assortment of Indian textiles to cater to the particular demands at the Guinea coast. In the same way, Richard Miles sent very specific instructions on what colors and types of textiles were currently in demand on the Gold Coast to his British suppliers, down to the very manufacturers that should be utilized. “Mr Kershaw’s [manufactures] are by no means equal to [Knipe’s],” he told a British contact in one 1779 letter, “at least not in the eyes of the Black traders here, & it is them that are to be pleased.”14 European trade in cotton textiles tied together Asia, the Americas, Africa, and Europe in a complex commercial web. Never before in the four millennia of the history of cotton had such a globe-spanning system been invented. Never before had the products of Indian weavers paid for slaves in Africa to work on the plantations in the Americas to produce agricultural commodities for European consumers. This was an aweinspiring system, speaking clearly to the transformative powers of a union of capital and state power. What was the most radical was not the particulars of these trades, but the system in which they were embedded and how different parts of the system fed upon one another: Europeans had invented a new way of organizing economic activity. This expansion of European trade networks into Asia, Africa, and the Americas did not rest primarily on offering superior goods at good prices, but on the military subjugation of competitors and a coercive European mercantile presence in many regions of the world. Depending on the relative balance of social power in particular places, there were variations on this central theme. In Asia and Africa, Europeans settled coastal enclaves and dominated transoceanic commerce, without at first much involvement in cultivation and manufacturing. In other parts of the world, most prominently the Americas, local populations were expropriated and often displaced or killed. Europeans invented the world anew by embarking upon plantation agriculture on a massive scale. Once Europeans became involved in production, they fastened their economic fortunes to slavery. These three moves—imperial expansion, expropriation, and slavery—became central to the forging of a new global economic order and eventually the emergence of capitalism. They combined with one other feature of this new world: states that backed these merchant and settler ventures, but that only weakly asserted their sovereignty over the places and peoples in distant territories. Instead, private capitalists, often organized in chartered companies (such as the British East India Company) asserted sovereignty over land and people, and structured connections to local rulers. Heavily armed privateering capitalists became the symbol of this new world of European domination, as their cannon-filled boats and their soldier-traders, armed private militias, and settlers captured land and labor and blew competitors, quite literally, out of the water. Privatized violence was one of their core competencies. While European states had envisioned, encouraged, and enabled the creation of vast colonial empires, they remained weak and thin on the ground, providing private actors the space and leeway to forge new modes of trade and production. Not secure property rights but a wave of expropriation of labor and land characterized this moment, testifying to capitalism’s illiberal origins. The beating heart of this new system was slavery. The deportation of many millions of Africans to the Americas intensified connections to India because it increased pressure to secure more cotton cloth. It was that trade that established a more significant European mercantile presence in Africa. And it was that trade that made it possible to give economic value to the vast territories captured in the Americas, and thus to overcome Europe’s own resource constraints. This multifaceted system certainly showed variation and changed over time, but it was sufficiently different from the world that came before and the world that would emerge from it in the nineteenth century that it deserves its own name: war capitalism. War capitalism relied on the capacity of rich and powerful Europeans to divide the world into an “inside” and an “outside.” The “inside” encompassed the laws, institutions, and customs of the mother country, where state-enforced order ruled. The “outside,” by contrast, was characterized by imperial domination, the expropriation of vast territories, decimation of indigenous peoples, theft of their resources, enslavement, and the domination of vast tracts of land by private capitalists with little effective oversight by distant European states. In these imperial dependencies, the rules of the inside did not apply. There, masters trumped states, violence defied the law, and bold physical coercion by private actors remade markets. While, as Adam Smith argued, such territories advanced “more rapidly to wealth and greatness than any other human society,” they did so via a social tabula rasa, which, perhaps ironically, provided the foundation for the emergence of very different societies and states on war capitalism’s “inside.”15 War capitalism had an unprecedented transformative potential. At the root of the emergence of the modern world of sustained economic growth, it created unfathomable suffering, but also a consequential transformation of the organization of economic space: A multipolar world increasingly became unipolar. Power long spread across multiple continents and through numerous networks increasingly became centralized through a single node, dominated by European capitalists and European states. At the core of this change stood cotton, as the multiple and diverse worlds of the production and distribution of this commodity increasingly lost ground to a hierarchical empire organized on a global scale. Within Europe itself, this reorganization of economic space had continent-wide repercussions. “Atlantic” powers such as the Netherlands, Great Britain, and France replaced the erstwhile economic powerhouses such as Venice and its northern Italian hinterland. As Atlantic trade superseded Mediterranean trade and as the New World became an important producer of raw materials, cities with links to the Atlantic also rose in prominence in the manufacturing of cotton textiles. Indeed, as early as the sixteenth century, expanded cotton manufacturing in Europe was contingent on a link to the rapidly expanding markets throughout the Atlantic world—from the cloth markets in Africa to the newly emerging sources of raw cotton in the Americas. In Flemish cities such as Bruges (starting in 1513) and Leiden (starting in 1574), cotton manufacturing burgeoned, as Antwerp began to carry a significant trade in raw cotton and overseas expansion that gave access to huge new markets. French manufacturers, for identical reasons, also embarked upon new cotton spinning and weaving ventures in the late sixteenth century.16 Amid these seismic geographic shifts, the most significant in the long run was cotton manufacturing’s arrival in England. By 1600, Flemish religious refugees began weaving cotton cloth in English towns. The earliest reference to cotton dates to 1601, “when the name of George Arnould, fustian weaver of Bolton, appears in the records of quarter sessions.” The industry grew, and by 1620 British cotton manufacturers exported their wares to France, Spain, Holland, and Germany. Cotton manufacturing thrived especially in the northern English county of Lancashire, where both the lack of guild control and the proximity to Liverpool, an important slaving port, became key to producers who supplied the African trade in slaves and plantations in the Americas.17 This slowly emerging English cotton industry drew on earlier experiences with the production of linen and woolens. As on the continent, cottons were at first manufactured in the countryside. Merchants, many of them Puritans and other dissenters, advanced raw cotton to peasants, who employed family labor seasonally to spin and weave, before returning the cloth to the merchants who sold it. As cotton cloth demand exploded, spinning and weaving became ever more important to smallholding peasants, and some of them eventually gave up their traditional crops and became entirely dependent on the industry. Some of the merchants who organized domestic cotton production turned into substantial businessmen. As they accumulated capital, they expanded production by providing ever more credit to ever more spinners and weavers, encouraging an “extensification” of production—its geographic dispersal throughout ever larger areas of the countryside. This was the classic putting-out system, quite similar to its incarnations across Asia centuries earlier, or to the British woolens industry. The countryside became ever more industrial and its inhabitants ever more dependent on putting-out work for distant merchants.18 Unlike Indian cotton spinners and weavers, the growing class of English cotton workers had no independent access to raw materials or to markets. They were entirely subordinated to the merchants—indeed, they enjoyed less independence and power than their Indian counterparts.19 British putting-out merchants, as a result, had far more power than Indian banias. The British cotton men were part of a rising global power whose navy increasingly dominated the world’s oceans, whose territorial possessions in the Americas and in Asia—India foremost among them—grew rapidly, and whose slavers created a plantation complex that rested in various ways on the manufacturing capacity of spinners and weavers thousands of miles away in the remote uplands of Lancashire and the plains of Bengal. Despite these beginnings, their significance emerged only in retrospect. Throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, Europe’s cotton industry was not particularly prominent. In England, but also elsewhere in Europe, the “manufacture of cotton remained almost stationary.” Even after 1697, it grew only slowly; for example, it took sixty-seven years for the amount of raw cotton worked up into thread and cloth to approximately double, to 3.87 million pounds. That was the amount of cotton used in an entire year. By 1858, in contrast, the United States would export this amount of cotton on average on a single day. France was similar, and, outside Britain and France, European cotton demand was even less significant.20 One reason for the relatively slow growth of European cotton manufacturing was the difficulty of accessing raw cotton. As cotton was not grown in Europe itself, the industry’s essential raw material had to be brought from distant locations. The modest demand for raw cotton among European manufacturers of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, before the heyday of the new machines that would by 1780 revolutionize cotton manufacturing, was largely met through established and diversified trade channels, in which cotton remained one commodity among many. In 1753, twenty-six ships arrived in the port of Liverpool from Jamaica with cotton, of which twenty-four had less than fifty bags of the fiber on board.21 There were neither merchants nor ports nor regions of the world that specialized in cotton production for export. Since the twelfth century the most important source of cotton imports to Europe, as we have seen, was the Ottoman Empire, especially western Anatolia and Macedonia. Throughout the seventeenth century, cotton from Izmir and Thessaloniki (Ottoman Salonica) continued to dominate local markets, arriving in London and Marseille alongside other products of the East, such as silk and mohair yarn. As European demand for raw cotton slowly expanded in the eighteen