orm of state, a state that would be the crucial ingredient for industrial capitalism and would eventually travel in quite peculiar patterns around the globe. After all, cotton exports expanded on the strength of British trade networks and the institutions in which they were embedded—from a strong navy creating and protecting market access to bills of lading allowing for the transfer of capital over large distances. This state was capable of forging and protecting global markets, policing its borders, regulating industry, creating and then enforcing private property rights in land, enforcing contracts over large geographical distances, forging fiscal tools to tax populations, and building a social, economic, and legal environment that made the mobilization of labor through wage payments possible. As one perceptive French observer argued in the early nineteenth century, “England has only arrived at the summit of prosperity by persisting for centuries in the system of protection and prohibition.”37 Indeed, in the end, it was not so much the new machines that revolutionized the world, impressive and important as they were. The truly heroic invention was the economic, social, and political institutions in which these machines were embedded. These institutions came to further define industrial capitalism and increasingly set it apart from its parent, war capitalism.38 The creation of such a state at the core of industrial capitalism was a complicated dance between various interests. A rising group of manufacturers pressed for a recognition of their interests, while statesmen and bureaucrats came to understand that their own exalted position in the world rested on Great Britain’s rapidly expanding manufacturing capacity. Manufacturers fought competing interests—the East India Company, for example—and competing elites, such as aristocratic landowners. And as merchants and manufacturers accumulated significant resources on which the state came to depend, these capitalists could translate their growing importance to the national economy into political influence.39 Cotton mill owners became increasingly active politically, culminating in the 1832 Reform Act that extended them the suffrage, allowing many textile entrepreneurs to move into the House of Commons, where they strenuously lobbied for the (global) interests of their industry, from the Corn Laws to British colonial expansion.40 The argument of the manufacturers for policies conducive to their interests was straightforward and strikingly modern, as this 1789 petition of 103 cotton goods manufacturers from around Glasgow to the Treasury shows: That your Petitioners began early to Manufacture British Muslins, and of late years have made great Progress in extending and improving this valuable branch of Trade, as well as the other Articles denominated Callicoes, and Mixed Goods. That the Power of Machinery applied on this Manufactory, joined to the new Facilities, which a more extended Practice has enabled your Petitioners to introduce, occasions a surplus of Goods which the Home Consumption cannot exhaust: and therefore a foreign Sale to a much greater extent becomes indispensably necessary, in order to occupy the Machinery.41 Built by newly empowered manufacturers and a state with vastly increased capacity, industrial capitalism found a very different answer to the question of how to mobilize labor, capital, and markets compared to its parent, war capitalism. Labor, unlike in the Americas, could be mobilized because changes in the countryside, including legal changes, had already produced a large group of landless proletarians who were forced to sell their labor power to survive, and did so without being physically coerced. Moreover, unlike for the plantation economy of the Americas, the territorial needs of cotton manufacturing were limited and focused mostly on accessing waterpower. As markets in land had emerged centuries before, and property rights in land were relatively secure and protected by the state, the land grab so typical of war capitalism did not and could not emerge in Britain itself. At the same time, an interventionist state was able to promote land uses deemed helpful to general economic development, for instance by allowing expropriations for the building of turnpikes and canals. Moreover, a highly centralized and bureaucratic state regulated and taxed domestic industry.42 Finally, and perhaps most decisive for this early moment in the emergence of industrial capitalism, the mechanisms of war capitalism could be externalized thanks to the state’s imperial expansion, in effect reducing capitalists’ need to recast the domestic social structure and their dependence on domestic resources, ranging from labor to food to raw materials. Some of the problems in the mobilization of labor, raw materials, territories, and markets had indeed been solved by war capitalism in the Americas, Africa, and Asia. And it was again a strong state (a state fortified by the institutional and financial accumulations of war capitalism) that was the root cause of the ability to externalize some of the labor, land, and resource mobilization. This state could in fact enforce different kinds of institutions in different parts of the world, with slavery and wage labor coexisting, for example. Manufacturers, merchants, and statesmen constructed a new form of capitalism—a capitalism that would dominate much of the world by the late nineteenth century. The modern state at its core was sometimes less “visible” than autocratic monarchical rule, and thus seemed “weaker” as its power was increasingly embedded in impersonal rules, laws, and bureaucratic mechanisms. Paradoxically, industrial capitalism made state power less visible as it amplified it. No longer did the personal authority of the king, the lord, or the master, or age-old custom, regulate the market; instead the market was made by explicit rules relentlessly enforced by contracts, laws, and regulations. Weaker states continued to rely on client networks, the subcontracting of authority, and arbitrary rule—characteristics that would not provide fertile ground for industrial capitalism. And as European colonialism spread its tentacles into ever more areas of the world, it further strengthened the state capacity of the colonizers, while at the same time undermining political authority and state capacity among the colonized. Just as state capacity became ever more important, its distribution around the globe became more unequal. Tellingly, even though Edward Baines argued in 1835 that “this [cotton] trade was not the nursling of government protection,” he proceeded to list in chronological order all “interferences of the legislature” that related to the cotton industry, from prohibitions to tariffs—a list that would fill seven pages, a striking reminder of the state’s importance to ensuring the “free” market of cotton.43 In Great Britain and eventually in a few other states, this dependence of capitalists on the state attached them firmly to one another and resulted in a kind of territorialization and “nationalization” of manufacturing capital. Ironically, that link between capitalists and the state would eventually also empower workers, who could deploy the state’s dependence on the consent of the governed to mobilize collectively for higher wages and better working conditions. It was also because of the awe-inspiring capacity of modern states (what Hegel would call the “spirit of history”) that war capitalism’s way of mobilizing land, labor, and markets would be largely irrelevant within Europe itself. This is in many ways surprising. After all, large-scale and capital-intensive enterprises, the mobilization of vast numbers of workers, and the tight managerial supervision of those workers had all been pioneered to great profit on the plantations of the Americas and seemed to show the way toward the reorganization of production. Yet in Britain itself, war capitalism provided only the foundation, not the nature, of capitalism. To dominate production, workers were neither enslaved nor populations murdered, for capitalists were not fulfilling frontier fantasies beyond the reach of the state. This was revolutionary, but in our world, in which the institutional foundations of industrial capitalism have become commonplace, it is hard to appreciate just how revolutionary it was. And the relationship between the expansion of manufacturing and the strengthening of the state was mutually reinforcing. Just as the British state undergirded the economic dynamism of the cotton industry, that industry’s many progeny became ever more important to the British state. To fuel the wars of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries that established British hegemony in the Atlantic, according to Edward Baines, Britain relied heavily on its commerce, and the most important line of commerce was cotton: “Without the means supplied by her flourishing manufacturers and trade, the country could not have borne up under a conflict as prolonged and exhausting.” Cotton goods valued at £150 million were exported between 1773 and 1815, estimated Baines, filling the coffers of manufacturers, merchants—and the state. It was the volume and balance of trade that provided the state the revenues it needed to invest, for example, in expanded naval power in the first place. State revenues indeed increased by a factor of sixteen between the late seventeenth and the early nineteenth centuries, as Britain engaged in these years in a total of fifty-six years of warfare. And fully one-third of tax revenues in 1800 came from customs. As the Edinburgh Review remarked in 1835, “How great a degree of our prosperity and power depend on their [manufacturers’] continued improvement and extension.” State bureaucrats and rulers understood that manufacturing was a way to produce revenue for the state, as the state itself now rested on the industrial world it had helped create.44 The first, lurching stages of this great acceleration, as seen at Quarry Bank Mill, might still have appeared modest. To modern eyes, the new technologies seem quaint, the factories small, and the impact of the cotton industry limited to a few regions in just one small part of the world, while much of the globe, even much of Great Britain, continued as before. The productive capacity of the first factories dotting the English countryside, looked at from a global perspective, was indeed minuscule. After all, Chinese spinners and weavers processed about 420 times as much cotton in 1750 as their counterparts in Britain in 1800, and the numbers for India were similar.45 In 1800, two decades after Greg’s midwifery to the Industrial Revolution, less than onetenth of 1 percent of global cotton cloth production came from machines invented on the British Isles. Yet once the social and institutional scaffolding of industrial capitalism had been invented in a decades-long conflict between capitalists, aristocrats, the state, workers, and peasants, it could spread to other industries and other parts of the world. The territory for further transformations was huge. The Industrial Revolution, powered by cotton, was, as historian Eric Hobsbawm has put it, “the most important event in world history.” It created a world unlike any that had come before. “This land of long chimneys,” as cotton manufacturer Thomas Ashton called it in 1837, was not just different from the centuries-old world of the British countryside, it was also a vast leap from the world of war capitalism that merchants, planters, and state officials had forged over the previous two hundred years. Its spectacle attracted visitors from all over the world, simultaneously awed and horrified by the sheer scale of it all: the endless chimneys, the chaotic cities, the spectacular social transformations. An 1808 English visitor saw in Manchester a town that was “abominably filthy, the Steam Engine is pestiferous, the Dyehouses noisesome and offensive, and the water of the river as black as ink.” Alexis de Tocqueville made that same pilgrimage in 1835 and saw a “sort of black smoke [that] covers the city. The sun seen through it is a disk without rays. Under this half daylight 300,000 human beings are ceaselessly at work. A thousand noises disturb this damp, dark labyrinth, but they are not at all the ordinary sounds one hears in great cities.” However, Tocqueville added, it was “from this foul drain [that] the greatest stream of human industry flows out to fertilise the whole world. From this filthy sewer pure gold flows. Here humanity attains its most complete development and its most brutish; here civilisation works its miracles, and civilised man is turned back almost into a savage.” Observers from the still pastoral United States were terrified by this new Old World; Thomas Jefferson wished that his compatriots would “never…twirl a distaff…let our workshops remain in Europe.”46 Within Britain, and within two decades, cotton’s evolution was vast. It began as one of the many spoils of imperial expansion, and became the driving commodity behind the Industrial Revolution. From tufted white bolls emerged a new global system: industrial capitalism. There was of course inventiveness and innovation in other industries, but cotton was the only one with a global scope, a strong connection to coercive labor, and a unique level of the state’s imperial attention to capture the necessary markets across the world. Although industrial capitalism would eventually dominate the world, in the immediate aftermath of its birth it helped to expand and sharpen war capitalism elsewhere. That was because England’s lopsided lead in the exploitation of industrial capitalism rested in the ability of its merchants to secure ever more inexpensive and predictable supplies of cotton for its factories.47 And while British cotton manufacturers quite suddenly demanded huge new quantities of cotton, the institutional structures of industrial capitalism were still too immature and provincial to generate the labor and territory needed to produce all this cotton. For a terrible ninety years, from about 1770 to 1860, as we will see, industrial capitalism reinvigorated rather than replaced war capitalism. In 1858, the president of the Galveston, Houston, and Henderson Railroad Company, Richard B. Kimball, visited Manchester. His observations are startling in their prescience: “As I entered your city, a sort of hum, a prolonged, continuous vibration struck my ear, as if some irresistible and mysterious force was at work. Need I say it was the noise of your spindles and your looms, and of the machinery which drives them?…. And I said to myself, what connection shall there be between Power in Manchester and Nature in America? What connection shall there be between the cotton fields of Texas, and the Factory, and loom, and spindle of Manchester?”48 The connection that he felt, but could not name, was