es in 1860 to 4,169 in 1863. The effect was especially severe on manufacturers of coarse cottons, such as the ones in Normandy, for whom the price of cotton determined much of the total price of production. By 1863, threefifths of the looms in Normandy were idle, while in the districts of Colmar and Belfort, where higher-quality cottons were produced, 35 percent of all spindles and 41 percent of all looms remained unused. That same year, a French national relief committee estimated that a quarter million textile workers were unemployed. In the textile towns of Alsace posters went up proclaiming, “Du pain ou la mort” (Bread or death).17 Lesser cotton centers also experienced severe distress: In the German lands of the Zollverein, imports of raw cotton fell by about 50 percent between 1861 and 1864 and hundreds of factory owners sent their workers home. Of the approximately three hundred thousand people engaged in the cotton industry in Saxony alone, one-third had lost their jobs by the fall of 1863, while the rest worked much shorter hours. In the northern part of the United States, removed from battle itself but not its consequences, tens of thousands of cotton workers lost employment, but the social effects were less severe because many found employment in the booming woolen mills that produced clothing for the Union army, or enlisted. In Moscow, however, 75 percent of all cotton spinning operations had shut down by 1863. Workers and manufacturers would have agreed with the U.S. consul in the German city of Stettin that “this war and its consequences stands before the whole civilized world as an interposing fate, which no nation however insignificant its direct relations to the field of contest may be, can entirely avoid.”18 While manufacturers closed mills and spinners and weavers suffered, cotton merchants lived—for a brief time—through a golden age. Rising prices for cotton led to a frenzy with “doctors, parsons, lawyers, wives and widows, and tradesmen speculating in it.” Cotton shipments changed hands many times between speculators before being delivered to factories; with each exchange a small profit could be made. Baring Brothers, confirmed in the summer of 1863 that the “amount of money made and still making in this article is almost fabulous; for three years or more not a bale has arrived from India but has paid profit and mostly a large one.” Liverpool cotton brokers gained as well from the presence of many speculators in the market (resulting in many transactions), and also rising prices (their commissions were a percentage of the value). In 1861, the total value of cotton imports had been £39.7 million and in 1864 it had reached £84 million, despite a much-reduced volume.19 As price volatility and speculation spread, so too did traders’ efforts to institutionalize speculative market transactions, especially forward selling. By 1863, the Liverpool Cotton Brokers’ Association had created a standard form that could be used by merchants making contracts about the future delivery of cotton, and Liverpool newspapers began reporting forward prices of Indian cotton. That year, “time bargains” had even begun to be established in Bombay, providing new opportunities for “men afflicted with a passion for gambling.” The war, in fact, resulted “in a revolutionary modernization of trade” in which the establishment of a formal futures market was perhaps the most important element.20 While merchants and speculators benefited from the global scramble for cotton, manufacturers loudly and frantically demanded the opening of new sources of the fiber. In France, factory owners from different cotton manufacturing regions continuously pressured the imperial government. “It is therefore urgently necessary to develop…new fields of production,” wrote the Chamber of Commerce of the city of Rouen. In 1862 a group of cotton manufacturers from Senones in the Vosges appealed to Napoleon III to bring Chinese workers to Algeria to grow cotton there. That year, cotton manufacturer Jacques Siegfried presented a “memoir” to the Société Industrielle de Mulhouse to advocate cotton growing in Algeria, supported by the Chamber of Commerce in Mulhouse: “No colonization for cotton, cotton for colonization.” When Antoine Herzog, a wealthy Alsatian cotton manufacturer, sat down in 1864 to pen a book on L’Algérie et la crise cotonnière, he hoped that France would recognize that it was “at the mercy of the political vicissitudes of a single people,” and therefore needed to “develop…by all possible means the cotton culture of countries that are capable of producing [it], and, in a special way, in our colonies.” Herzog personally pleaded with Napoleon for an audience to have him support colonial cotton-growing efforts and even traveled to Algeria to investigate the opportunities for cotton production there.21 Pressured by manufacturers and concerned about the suffering and mobilization of cotton workers, government bureaucrats expressed concerns as well. Cotton, after all, was central to their national economies and ultimately to the maintenance of social peace. Some European officials advocated recognition of the Confederacy and breaking the Union blockade to secure that urgently needed cotton. Others hoped for new sources of cotton from places outside the United States—especially the two European powers that had both substantial cotton industries and large colonial holdings, Britain and France. Even before the outbreak of the war, British foreign secretary Lord John Russell had hastened to assure the cotton manufacturers of Manchester that his government would do all in its power to secure cotton from sources outside the United States. Yet in July 1862 the American consul to the Egyptian city of Alexandria, William Thayer, reported that “statesmen are almost paralyzed with terror at the hopelessness of relief for the evils in prospect.” The Prussian minister to Washington, Freiherr von Gerolt, along with his British and French counterparts, repeated many times in his meetings with U.S. secretary of state William Seward how important cotton was to their countries’ economic well-being. On numerous occasions, the House of Commons, the House of Lords, and the French Senate debated the “cotton question.”22 This intense public concern with securing access to cheaply priced raw materials essential to national industries was a clear departure from the past. Since the 1780s, raw cotton markets had been decisively dominated by merchants, but now cotton had become a matter of state, a state empowered not least by decades of merchant political mobilization. Heavy investments in industrial production, a novelty in human history, demanded a constant supply of land, labor, and money. As political leaders grappled with the cotton famine, they saw that the emergence of industrial capitalism had made them just as dependent on a predictable supply of cheap raw materials as the manufacturers themselves. Lord Palmerston warned in October 1861 that England must have cotton because “we cannot allow millions of our People to perish.” The French Ministry of Colonies commissioned reports on cotton growing prospects in such diverse places as Guyana, Siam, Algeria, Egypt, and Senegal. The outlines of a new kind of imperialism began to emerge.23 Responding to the urgent demand for cotton, forty-six hundred miles to the east of Liverpool and ninety-two hundred miles from Antietam, Indian merchants and cultivators, British colonial bureaucrats, and Manchester manufacturers embarked on a frantic race to grow cotton for world markets. As we have seen, Britain had tried to cultivate India as a reliable source of cotton since the 1820s, yet the effort had been, according to the Bombay Chamber of Commerce, “a signal failure.” Indeed, as The Economist noted before the outbreak of the Civil War, “As long as there were negroes in the Southern States, and those negroes could be kept to work, it would have been venturesome, not enterprising” to grow cotton for world markets in India.24 The bombardment of Fort Sumter, however, announced that India’s hour had come. For cotton merchants, manufacturers, and statesmen, no place seemed more promising a source of cotton than India. Indeed, it was “the only remedy for the misery that appeared to be hanging over us,” according to Edmund Potter of the Manchester Chamber of Commerce. During the American Civil War, British cotton capitalists and colonial bureaucrats worked feverishly to increase India’s cotton output and move it to market. “Cotton,” as one observer wrote from Nagpore in July 1861, “appears to me to be the leading topic of the day,” and the English-language press of India was filled with hundreds if not thousands of stories about cotton. Manchester manufacturers shipped cottonseed to Bombay to be distributed to growers; they moved cotton gins and cotton presses into the countryside; and they talked about investing in railroads to remove cotton to the coast. They ran afoul, however, of India’s well-known obstacles. In 1862, when the Manchester Cotton Supply Association sent cotton gins and presses to India, they planned to unload them in the newly constructed port of Sedashegur, close to areas in which cotton was grown. Yet when the ships arrived, they found that the port had not been finished. Eventually they moved the gins and presses to another port, which did have facilities for unloading, but the road linking this port to the cottongrowing areas was not complete and the machinery could not be moved.25 Confronted with such problems, British cotton manufacturers, especially through the channels of two organizations they dominated, the Manchester Chamber of Commerce and the Manchester Cotton Supply Association, redoubled their efforts to transform the Indian countryside. After all, asked Manchester Chamber of Commerce member Henry Ashworth, “what is the value of our possessions if we do not use them?” Ashworth and others pressed a newly receptive British government for massive infrastructure investments, changes in criminal codes to make the adulteration of cotton a crime, and new property laws to create clearly defined and easily marketable property in land.26 Such pressures by manufacturers and merchants to bring the state in did not fall on deaf ears. Already in September 1861, the finance minister of India, Samuel Laing, met with representatives of cotton interests in Manchester to discuss ways to improve Indian cotton production, meetings that would continue in Manchester, London, and Bombay throughout the war. Charles Wood, the British foreign secretary for India, saw the urgency as well, recommending “to get as much as possible from India.” British colonial officials wrote dozens of reports to investigate the cotton-growing potential of this or that area of India.27 The British government and manufacturers agreed that the administrative, legal, and infrastructural capacity of the imperial state needed to be pushed into the Indian countryside. Perhaps most important was manufacturers’ pressure to create a new kind of legal environment in order to facilitate European investment in and domination of cotton production. Cotton capitalists wanted to change Indian contract law to make “penal the breach of contract where advances have been made,” giving “the advancer an absolute lien upon the crop he advances upon to the extent of his advances,” allowing for penalties including prison at hard labor. If merchants could secure such an absolute claim on cotton grown with the support of their capital, investment would be encouraged, and it would help overcome “the difficulty of enforcing the observance of legal Contracts with the agricultural Population of India.” Such a system would permit cultivators to devote their efforts entirely to cash crops, since advances would allow them to purchase food grains before their own cotton crop ripened. Eventually this pressure succeeded; new contract laws were imposed. In 1863, moreover, criminal laws were enacted that made the adulteration of cotton a crime punishable by imprisonment at hard labor.28 Such market making went hand in hand with physical infrastructure projects serving both the interests of the “Manchester people” and the colonial state, especially the construction of railroads, which, as Charles Wood remarked, would not only move cotton to ports but also allow for the quick movement of troops to subdue rebellions. During the first year of the war alone, government expenditures on infrastructure projects in India nearly doubled. When in 1864 the British government for India allocated £7 million to “Public Works,” the Times of India commented that the “budget…may be considered as devoted to the express object of opening up readier access from the field to the market.” Wood himself, concerned about the pressures from Manchester, wrote in March 1863 to Sir Charles Trevelyan, India’s finance minister, to urge him to spend more aggressively on infrastructure improvements, as not to do so would be a “suicidal act.” “These roads,” warned Wood, “we must make.” Moreover, the colonial government reduced the cotton-goods import duty from 10 to 5 percent, a reduction that British manufacturers strongly favored since they believed the duties gave “a fictitious encouragement to…mechanically produced manufactures,” thereby “diverting the capital and labour of India from the cultivation of the varied productions which the soil would yield in great abundance.” India’s future, they agreed, was not in manufacturing, but in the provision of raw cotton to European industry.29 Yet despite such far-reaching interventions, manufacturers remained dissatisfied with the British government. Their decades-old calls for more state intervention now took on nearly hysterical tones, hastening the emergence of an even tighter relationship between merchants, manufacturers, and the imperial state, a relationship that became the hallmark of the empire of cotton during the last third of the nineteenth century and beyond. The Manchester Chamber of Commerce consistently complained about the government’s lack of commitment to cotton. Frustrated manufacturers tried to increase pressure by taking their cause to Parliament. In June 1862 members of Parliament from cotton-consuming districts demanded greater government commitment to infrastructure improvements in India to facilitate the movement of cotton to world markets. “The supply of cotton,” argued Stockport MP John Benjamin Smith on the occasion of this debate, “is not a mere Lancashire question—it is a question of great national importance.” These sentiments became so strong that Lancashire manufacturers eventually complained publicly about Charles Wood, and members of the Cotton Supply Association demanded nothing less than “the impeachment of the incompetent Minister.” The British government replied in kind, with Wood regularly expressing his annoyance with “the Manch