## First contacts with Piet Mondrian and the architect J. J. P. Oud Van Doesburg's earliest opinion of Mondrian's work can be found in his article Art criticism',1 published on 6 November 1915 in Eenheid and presenting a review of the exhibition ‘Moderne Kunst' in the Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam, which contained works by Mondrian, Gestel, Sluiters, Schelfhout and Le Fauconnier (see p. 105). Van Doesburg's immediate enthusiasm for what he called the spiritual and architectural quality of Mondrians work quickly led him to seek a contact by letter, also in November 1915. Although it was to remain rather formal until they had met, this was the beginning of a long correspondence which lasted until 1923 when Van Doesburg also settled in Paris. Towards the end of 19ǐ5 Van Doesburg, again by letter, suggested founding a magazine with Mondrian, an idea rejected by the latter as premature.2 In January 1916 they met for the first time, without, however, producing any change so far as the magazine was concerned. Towards the end of February or the beginning of March 1916 Van Doesburg was demobilized and settled in Leyden. Shortly after his arrival he met the architect J. J. P. Oud with whom he was to have frequent discussions on the founding of his magazine. Again, Oud's response may explain why Van Doesburg turned to other organizational activities such as the founding of artists’ associations. On 24 March he became co-founder of the artists' association De Anderen (The Others) in Amsterdam. (The president was Erich Wichmann; vice-president, Joh. Tielens; secretary, Theo van Doesburg; executive members, Louis Saalborn and Phocas Fokkens.) Soon after, on 31 May, Van Doesburg helped to found a second artists’ association, De Sphinx (The Sphinx), in Leyden. (Its president was J. J. P. Oud and the other officers were as follows: vice-president, D. Roggeveen; first secretary, E. G. Kessler; second secretary, Van Doesburg; treasurer, J. H. Kriest.) Van Doesburg optimistically described The Others as a group of ‘style-conscious' artists.³ There were, however, as many styles as there were artists.