## I. K. Bonset: Van Doesburg as a Dadaist and poet In April 1920 De Stijl's second manifesto, called Literature, appeare, signed by Van Doesburg, Mondrian and Kok.1 In May l920 the first poem by I. K. Bonset, ‘X-images, was published (see p. 112).² ‘I. K. Bonset was Van Doesburg's pseudonym as a poet and writer. This character seems to have come to life somewhat before the publication of ‘X-images', for among his unprinted manuscripts there is a collection of poems entitled New World-Images. Cubist and Expressionist Poems 1913–1920, by I. K. Bonset.3 Of the poems which were signed, only the early ones written before 1915 carry the name Van Doesburg. The first mention of I. K. Bonset is found in å letter from Van Doesburg to Tristan Tzara, written toward the end of 1918 and describing Bonset as a Dutch Dadaist.4 Thus, the pseudonym seems to have been invented between 1916 and 1918. However, to follow the movements of Bonset seems always to have been a difficult job. Mondrian is known to have warned Van Doesburg against Bonset since he was under the impression that Bonset was using their ideas. In addition to admiring Apollinaire, who also published Cubist' poems, Van Doesburg was strongly attracted by writers like Tristan Tzara and Hugo Ball. The influence of Ball's Flight from Time⁵ which also featured the first soundpoems, can be found for example in ‘The Other Face'6, which consisted of a series of aphorisms, the first of which was a statement on Dada. (Later this work was turned into a novel.) There is little doubt that Van Doesburg saw Dada's revolutionary character and its engagement in the destruction of an old culture as a necessary preparation for the realization of De Stijl's utopian aims. He presented De Stijl's position on Dada in an article under the significant title Is a Universal Plastic Notion Possible Today? In this he wrote, ‘Only a radical cleansing of social and artistic life as, in the domain of art, is already done by Dada, which is anti-sentimental and healthy to the core since it is anti-art, only unscrupulously striking down any systematically bred amateurism in any field, can prepare civilization for the New Vision's happiness which is greatly and purely alive in a few people.'7 Consequently, Kok, Mondrian, Oud and Van Doesburg addressed their letters to one another or signed them with ‘dada' added to the surname. This relationship of Dada as a preparation for Neo-plasticism can again be met in ‘The Task of the New Architecture\*8 which appeared in Bouwkundig Weekblad (Architectural Weekly). First, this contained an attack on Berlage, accusing him of rationalism and naturalism. This criticism was to meet with Mondrian's disapproval soon after. Secondly and consequent upon the Dada anti-philosophical attitude, the philosophies of Kant, Schopenhauer, Fichte and Hegel, in all of whom De Stijl showed interest, were criticized as obsolete systems. In this criticism, he presented views later to be developed in his own Dadaist antiphilosophy,‘Caminoscopy'.