## Berlin and the rise of Functionalism Van Doesburg became increasingly interested in technology and the machine, similar in this respect to Le Corbusier and the Berlin artists from whom the G-group, later developing into the ‘Berlin Ring of Architects', was shortly to originate. He published a series of three articles called ‘The Šignificance of Mechanical Aesthetics in Architecture and the Other Arts'.1 These articles represent Van Doesburg's reaction to the Bauhaus, where. in the tradition of Morris and Ruskin, handicraft was still favoured over industrial production. The second article, criticizing handicraft methods was published in July 1921 when Van Doesburg had already been installed at Weimar for a few months. This same essay also includes, in the third and last article of the series. his reaction to Oud's lecture ‘On Future Architecture and its Architectural Possibilities'. delivered in February 192l to the architects' association Opbouw in Rotterdam.² Oud disagreed with Van Doesburg and Mondrian over the use of colour in architecture - a disagreement that was to lead to his leaving De Štijl. In his lecture he considered that applying colour to architecture was impractical because paint is subject to weathering. Much of this was a direct criticism of Van Doesburg's activities in the preceding year, which were mainly dedicated to collaboration in architecture. At Drachten, a small town in the province of Friesland, the architect De Boer built workers' housing projects, shops and a school for which Van Doesburg designed the colour schemes. It was also at this time, just before he settled in Germany, that he executed stained glass windows for the School of Agriculture at Drachten, whereas the December 1920 issue of De Stijl carried Van Doesburg's second design for an interior, which had been executed in 1919 and incorporated furniture by Gerrit Rietveld.3 Furthermore, Oud was

above. Their differing interpretations of Cubism produced another disagreement between Oud and Van Doesburg. Oud, in an article ‘Architecture and Cubism6 in' De Bouwwereld (The Building World) said Cubism represented ‘a process of destruction and reconstruction' which explained why it was now obsolete. Van Doesburg's approach was called ‘a permanent Cubism' and considered of provincial importance'. His answer, printed in abridged form in the same periodical,7 was published in full in De Stijl under the title ‘Theconsequence of Pen and T-square’.8 His purpose was to rebut Oud's statement in‘Architecture and Cubism', that it was his own ideas which had led to De Stijl's view of architecture. Instead, Van Doesburg stated that this new vision had developed from and been spread by the Neo-plastic painters only. In the meantime, in spite of his criticism of its use in architecture, Oud continued to apply colour, now without the collaboration of Van Doesburg, in several of his housing-projects.9 Yet, the defence of Neo-plastic ideals made jointly by Mondrian and Van Doesburg could not prevent Oud from further promoting the Functionalist trend. # The International Congress of Progressive Artists, Düsseldorf 1922 Much of the turmoil in the artistic and social ideas current at that time were profiled at the occasion of thè International Congress of Progressive Artists held in Düsseldorf from 29 to 31 May 1922. A report on this congress can be found in the issue of De Stijl, IV, 4, April 1922, which is entirely devoted to it. Van Doesburg quotes part of the invitation to attend the congress, in which it is posited that artists of all countries should unite, free from any political meddling or indiviualist opportunism. The Düsseldorf Congress brought together delegations of artists of Expressionist and Constructivist tendencies. Since it did not succeed in formulating who was to be considered a ‘progressive artist', it demonstrated the conflict between these two directions in art - a struggle also reflected clearly by the Bauhaus at this time. Van Doesburg representing De Stijl, read its first manifesto and listed its ‘Creative Demands'. (See p. 127.) However, he again found himself in opposition to the Expressionist trend when calling for a universal plastic expression in his point Three.1 In a summarizingProclamation' by theInternational Section of Constructivist Artists', signed by Van Doesburg, Lissitzky and Richter, the congress was declared a failure because its ‘predominantly individualistic approach' hampered any international progressive solidarity'.2 This closing proclamation is of interest for several reasons. In the first place, it offers in a footnote by Van Doesburg an explanation for the use of the term‘Constructivist', which was chosen to distinguish it from the Impulsivist' (read, Expressionist) approach. Furthermore, it presents a definition of the progressive artist as one who rejects subjectivism and the work of art as a self-contained entitv. Instead it declares ‘art to represent a general and real expression of creative energy, organizing man's progress, that is to say, it is a means of the process of labour in general',3 and thus calls for the unity of art and life. The ‘Proclamation’ represents a mixture of ideas presented at the congress by the Constructivist group Gegenstand (Ehrenburg and Lissitzky), which argues the unity of economic, scientific and technical life with art,4 and those of De Stijl group, as set forth by Van Doesburg with his demands for pure creation, in his ‘Creative Demands'. The Proclamation’ can also be considered one of the main documents concerning the birth of Constructivism in Western Europe. Two of its signatories, Lissitzky and Richter, will appear in 1923 as the editors of the Constructivist magazineG , material Towards Elementary Plastic Expression'. This magazine served as a mouthpiece for the aims of the Constructivist group which were first made public at the congress. G then seems to replace, apparently in an attempt at political neutralism, the magazine Ves, Ġegenstand, under the editorship of Ehrenburg and Lissitzky, of which only two issues had appeared in 1922. However, prior to the founding of G , the. first results of the activities of the congress at Düsseldorf were published in De Stijl, chiefly as result of a request forwarded at the congress by the Hungarian Ma-group (L. Kassak, Moholy-Nagy and others) which preferred publication in a periodical from a politically neutral country. Much of the uncertainty at the congress resulted also from the confused situation in the contemporary art of Soviet Russia, where Constructivist, Expressionist, Realist and Folk-Art tendencies were all present. Following the publication in 1920 in Moscow of the Manifesto on Proletarian Art, the issue the same year of Gabo and Pevsner's Constructivist Realistic Manifesto and Lenin's speech on the New Economic Policy of 1921, the proletarian tendency, which later on produced Social Realism, began to predominate and, in fact, caused the permanent emigration of several Russian abstract artists to Western Europe. Much of the material discussed at the congress was elaborated upon in various subsequent issues of De Stijl. Werner Graeff published in the May 1922 issue of De Stijl his manifesto For the New'6 which summarized once more the Constructivist point of view as presented in Düsseldorf and underlined the strength of the movement for machine art prevalent in Germany at this time, as well as the influence of De Stijl universalism. In the June issue of De Stijl Lissitzky, a member of De Stijl in 1922, but also a close collaborator of Van Doesburg's in 1923, published his article ‘Proun'7 (Proun’stands for PRO and abbreviations of U(twershdenije) NOW(ychform) IS(kusstwa): PROUNOWIS, meaning the founding of new forms in art) which shows great similarity with Van Doesburg's adherence to the scientific view of matter in space-time'. In the same issue, Hans Richter, a member of De Stijl from 1921 until 1925, published an article entitled ‘Film'.8 Van Doesburg again defended the new art in an article (meaning ‘squarely') against Mimetic Artists'9 which was another' reaction to the Düsseldorf Congress. The July issue of De Stijl contained a contribution entitled Production and Reproduction'10 by L. Moholy-Nagy, representing the Hungarian group Ma, and an article by the Futurist Enrico Prampolini, ‘The Aesthetics of the Machine and Mechanical Introspection in Art'.11 Both articles once again revealed the increased contemporary interest in the idea of machine art, which had been initiated on the Continent as early as 1909 by Futurism with its emphasis on cars, planes and electricity. It is interesting to watch Futurism, through the mouth of Prampolini, try to catch up with the rapid spread of the ‘machine attitude' then current in Germany. In his turn Van Doesburg was given space in the first issue of the magazine Ves, Gegenstand for his article ‘Monumental Art',12 while Ma published his article Architecture as the Synthesis of the Plastic Arts'13 in its July issue. After having allowed a variety of opinions to be published in De Stijl, Van Doesburg, beginning in the same July issue, expounded the attitude of De Stijl towards all these phenomena in a series of articles called ‘The Present State of Modern Art',14 the first instalment of which had already been published in December 1921. In the July 1922 issue, which contained the Fragments II, III and IV of this series, he attacked the ‘so-called modern magazines' in their negative reaction to Cubism and at the same time claimed that De Stijl was the outcome and culmination of Cubism. In Fragments III and IV, the need for an ‘elementary plasticism' as expressed by the younger generation in Holland, Russia, Germany and Hungary, was discussed in terms of an aim typical of Van Doesburg, that is, to synthesize all constructive tendencies in an international and universal style. This objective seemed within reach when the August issue of De Stijl printed the manifesto ‘K.I.: International Union of Creative Constructivists', signed by Van Doesburgz Ps Richter, Lissitzky, Maes and Burchartz. Although this manifesto was a collective effort, there is little doubt that Van Doesburg was its leading spirit since in the French translation the ‘creative' constructivists are called ‘neoplastic constructivists. Their manifesto further underlines the gap between those artists who favoured an impersonal mechanico-functional approach and those who considered art to represent exclusively a subjective, psychological manifestation of the individual. Its most important feature was a stress on collective creation that is to provide man's entire social environment with a new plastic quality, as opposed to the usual method of each artist's producing isolated works on his own. It is evident that with this new approach an attempt was being made to bring to art the approach of science and technology where teamwork was the established mode of working. Thus the single art product was stated to be of no concern except when through research or experiment it forwarded possibilities which so far had not been realized in life as a whole. In continuing his series ‘The Present State of Modern Art, Van Doesburg presented an article under the subtitle Plastic Art in Russia',16 in which he went along with El Lissitzky's Constructivist views by criticizing Suprematism. He accused this movement of restricting the objective abstract means of expression, the geometric plane, for the purpose ofdemonstrating the end of painting with naturalistic form. In contrast to Šuprematism's restriction, De Stijl, according to Van Doesburg, acquired a positive character by widening the use of pure plastic means for the expression oflife as a whole in a precise and true way', without incorporating any additional symbolic or imaginary values as was the case with Suprematism. This concurs with the views Lissitzky put forward in the article ‘Proun' where he describes how ‘instead of remaining a mimeticist, the artist becomes the constructor of a new world of objects',17 and ultimately takes this new world to represent man's entire built environment, 1922 was the year when Van Doesburg turned from producing paintings to architecture. Among the basic factors explaining Van Doesburg's awakened interest in architecture are, first, the abandonment by other architects of Neo-plasticism, which they considered an illusion or an impractical aesthetic for their medium (R. Van^'t Hoff and J. J. P. Oud), second the experimentation with the threedimensional art object by Constructivism, and, finally, the aim of fusing art with everyday life. This last factor was the most important and was repeatedly stressed in many art circles in Germany. It stimulated the movement to threedimensional construction also by the way of architecture which then had to be considered as a form of fine art. The Weimar models made that year can clearly be seen to possess Cubism's fourdimensional character by their multi-sided expansion into space. Two of them were reproduced in Bouwkundig Weekblad (Architectural Weekly), accompanying an article by Van Doesburg with the titleThe impact of the Stijl movement in Germany',1 which was written in December 1922 and published early in 1923. The two models (see p. 116) were made respectively by B. Sturzkopf and by H. Vogel, students in Van Doesburg's De Stijl course. It is interesting to compare them with models made in approximately 192l in the department of architecture of the Bauhaus, which reflect Gropius' experiments with standardization and automation in building.² In Gropius' models the groundplan continues to be based on a single rectangle comprising all functions. A certain degree of plasticity is achieved by the method of adding and taking away repetitive standard volumes. In contrast to this construction method through juxtaposition, the models made under Van Doesburg's supervision exhibit a strikingly greater plastic movement in both groundplan and elevation, and, moreover, their effects are achieved in a more organic way. The dynamic unity of these models springs from the element of interpenetration incorporated in the groundplan. In particular, the groundplan of the model by Vogel consists of three interpenetrating squares and anticipates the four-dimensional architecture Van Doesburg was to produce in the Paris models designed in collaboration with C. van Eesteren the following year. As has been pointed out, the multi-sided plasticity of these models relates them via Van 't Hoff to the architecture of Frank Lloyd Wright. The Weimar models must have been made before September 1922, since in this month Bouwkundig Weekblad carried an article by Van Doesburg entitled‘The New Aesthetics and its Realization'³ in which it is apparent that Van Doesburg's ideas must have been realized in concrete form. This article would also be published in German in De Stijl the following year, and already contained Van Doesburg's entire architectural programme for 1924 (see p. 127). In reply to Wright's call for a Gothic-inspired architecture horizontal (that is classical) in appearance, he rejected an architecture based on either the Middle Ages or the Renaissance and expounded the modern spacetime view instead. He wrote, Because of the advance in physics in our time, the concept of matter as solid substance was changed and, as in the field of art, came to be seen as an entity of energy.’ Thus, this article gives clear proof that Van Doesburg knew he had taken architecture one step further by substituting a fourdimensional approach for a Wrightian method of extended three-dimensional architectural masses. Moreover, this development was largely the result of his experience in the art of painting, in particular of his own Neo-plastic paintings of 1918. Van Eesteren, who was soon to become Van Doesburg's collaborator on the next set of models, was travelling in Germany this year. He had won the Prix de Rome with his design for a Royal Institute of Sciences, Literature and the Fine Arts, which was a rigidly symmetrical composition in the best academic tradition.4 After Adolf Behne had drawn his attention to Van Doesburg's presence there he paid a short visit to Weimar early in the spring. Although he attended some lectures Van Doesburg gave in his De Stijl course, he was at that time in no way involved in the architectural experiments which produced the Weimar models.⁵ In the summer, Van Eesteren went to Berlin where he began to work on the design for the university hall to which Van Doesburg was to add colour in 1923. In October 1922 Van Eesteren returned to Weimar to attend the Constructivist Congress of which Van Doesburg was the host and at which Lissitzky, Richter, Moholy-Nagy, Kemeny and Schwitters, as well as many others, were present.