## De Stijl and Proun versus Functionalism 1923 The differences in approach among Constructivists became much more distinct in the course of this year. In his article‘The New Aesthetics and its Realization', (p. l27) now appearing in German in the March issue of De Stijl,1 Van Doesburg gave the first indication of a divergence of opinion with the significant sentence, ‘The modern view (in contrast to the solely constructive view) conceives of plastic expression as the organization of plastic means as an unmistakable unity.’ (Van Doesburg's italics.) Although the article accepted the idea of incorporating engineering in artistic creation, it expressly stated that painting is ‘the most advanced form of art' and indicates the path leading towards modern architecture, in Holland through Neo-plasticism and in Russia through Suprematism and Proun. This stress on creative aesthetics makes it clear that Van Doesburg (de Stijl) and Lissitzky (Proun) had united against that third movement which was trying to absorb West European Constructivism into what later on was called Functionalism (i.e. function as the essence of everything constructed). The key to the situation is to be found in the opening sentence of this article, where Van Doesburg wrote, ‘Construction does not imply plastic architecture.'This criticism was addressed to Mies van der Rohe, a leading member of the G-group consisting of Richter, Lissitzky, Hilbersheimer and Graeff among others with whom Van Doesburg had had frequent discussions and had found himself in disagreement concerning matters of art. The fact that Van Doesburg published the article in German in the ordinarily Dutch De Stijl is significant. Mies van der Rohe, in a short article, Office building',² which was written in Berlin in May 1923 and published in G□, made the folowing statement: ‘We reject any aesthetic speculation, any doctrine and any formalism.' The second issue of G , published in September, carried a still shorter article from Mies' hand with two similar statements, ‘We do not reckon with the problem of form but with the problem of building only’ and ‘The will to style also represents formalism. We have other worries."3 The first two of these three statements, without doubt reflecting earlier pronouncements during discussions in the G group, comprise reactions to Van Doesburg's criticism Construction does not imply plastic architecture'. The third statement was one Mies van der Rohe made in connection with Van Doesburg's important lecture ‘The Will to Style', which was given in Jena, Weimar and Berlin in l922 and published in De Stijl (see p. 115). Thus a gap between an utilitarian functional approach (the group of architects around Mies van der Rohe) and an aesthetic functional approach (the De Stijl group and Proun) among the Constructivists was made public. Rather against the run of his previous writing Van Doesburg wrote a lead article in the first issue ofG under the titleTowards Elementary Plastic Expression'⁴ in which he made a strong distinction between architecture, sculpture and painting as separate, independent forms of art. (See p. 127). In ‘The New Aesthetics and its Realization', written the year before, he had stated them to be merged in an‘unmistakable unity'. The sole explanation for this seeming inconsistency lies in the fact that the utilitarian functional approach was to consider plastic art (aesthetics) as representing a speculation and thus a lesser thing. In sketching the importance of architecture, sculpture and painting separately Van Doesburg deals with this rationalist view by finding each of them to be of equal merit. This is reinforced by the publication, shortly after the appearance of the first issue of G , of an article by Mondrian with the significant title Is Painting Necessarily Inferior to Architecture?'.5 In this article Mondrian rejected the utilitarian functional approach in architecture considering plastic art an arbitrary thing, and proposed Neo-plasticism as the new aesthetics so as to produce a unity in which architecture and painting will completely fuse into one art form. Amidst these opinions Hans Richter and Werner Graeff, also in the first issue of G , attempted to keep things in balance by publishing a manifesto-like editorial which represented a mixture of Functionalist and De Stijl views. Lissitzky published an article called Space'⁶ which similarly combined an aesthetical creative approach to the plastic expression of universal space with a functional-constructive approach to the expression of man's habitable space by means of Proun construction. There is also some similarity of approach between Lissitzky's article, which was written in The Hague in May 1923, and Van Doesburg's article, ‘The Significance of Colour for Interior and Exterior Architecture'7 published in the May 1923 issue of Bouwkundig Weekblad. (See p. 137).That time and place were the same indicates that these articles represent a cooperative effort. Both authors advocate a dynamic architecture consisting of planes and colour as the means to establish an aesthetic impression of spatial relationships.'However, whereas Lissitzky limited himself to advocating that Constructivist architecture should embody aesthetic values, Van Doesburg attacked ‘constructive and solely functional architecture'. This he felt, omitted any aèsthetic notion and regarded architecture as the sum of stone, iron and glass, serving only the mechanistic function of life: living and working'. Apart from alluding to Le Corbusier and criticizing Oud's rejection of colour in architecture, this attack was again addressed to Mies van der Rohe, who in his article ‘Office building' had said that architecture consisted of concrete, iron and glass which fulfil the demands of office-work, organization,clearnessandeconomy.‘TheSignificance of Colour for Interior and Exterior Architecture', is also of importance in respect of Van Doesburg's architectural programme of 1924, since it comprises several notions on the use of colour in architecture. With Van Doesburg's departure from Germany and Lissitzky's journey to Davos in Switzerland for the treatment of tuberculosis the two men who worked hardest to prevent universal Constructivism from turning into functional Constructivism had left the scene of battle. Some impatience with this development in architecture was expressed by Van Doesburg in ‘Conditions for a Ñew Architecture'.8 This article was almost word for word the same as his essay‘Towards Elementary Plastic Expression' but elaborated upon it by criticizing Russian Constructivism for merely formulating the new constructive problems without managing to solve them. Meanwhile, Gropius' Bauhaus, where Itten had been succeeded by Moholy-Nagy, was coming closer to the Functionalist approach as propagated by the group of architects around Mies van der Rohe. Mies'status can be seen from the second issue of G , published in September 1923, of which he was co-editor, and which contained his attack on ‘The Will to Style'and which included reproductions from W. Lindner's Engineering in Building.9 This was significant in that it showed increased interest in the role of engineering in architecture, and the book was to exert considerable influence on Functionalist architecture in vears to come. Van Doesburg contributed an article to this issue, called Parisian Novelties – Motive: if Only'10, which was largely Dadaist in character. As such, it was irrelevant to the struggle between the aesthetic and the utilitarian approaches in architecture, which still continued but which had largely been won by Mies van der Rohe. Although his Functionalist theorv remained uncommitted to any specific aesthetic approach, Mies van der Rohe made two designs in 1923 which reflected the influence of Van Doesburg's stay in Germany. For example, the groundplan of his design for a brick country-house derived from Van Doesburg's painting, Rhvthms of a Russian Dance (1918) (p. 35). Moreover, his design for a concrete country-house, a model of which was reproduced in the September issue of G , extends the component architectural volumes in all directions in space in the same manner found in the brick country-house. However, it also reveals a similarity of approach with Gropius's pre-fabricated housing projects, which were equally based on spatial extension, be it through the addition or subtraction of architectural parts. The results of Mies van der Rohe's direct application of Van Doesburg's Rhythms of a Russian Dance are mannered owing to his combining the method of extending by juxtaposition with the method of the original in which the planar areas seem not only to expand but also to interlock in mutual interpenetration. This mannerism can be seen in Mies' brick country-house with its severe separation of the living and the other functional