## Van Doesburg's architectural programme, 1924 At the occasion of the second exhibition of De Stijl architecture in Paris Van Doesburg published a sixteen-point programme, called Towards Plastic Architecture' (p. 142).1 Points Three and Four summarize the notions of an architecture which is both economical and functional. The third paragraph of Point Five is strikingly similar to a remark by Lissitzky in ‘Proun' on the construction of space. Van Doesburg's description of architectural construction as a coordinated system in which all points correspond to an equal number of points in universal, unlimited open space', can be compared to Lissitzky's comments on space: ‘The void, chaos, the anti-natural becomes space, that is to say order, definition and plastic form, if, in a certain way, we define the markingpoints through co- and inter-relationships. The construction and the measure of the manifold marking points bestow a certain tension to space. When we change the marking-points, we change the tension o the space that has been created from one and the same void.'² Both formulations, though differently worded, represent one and the same Einstein-like approach, which Van Doesburg had presented for the first time in 1916. This similarity largely stems from the fact that both Proun and De Stijl descended from Analytical Cubism with its interest in ‘plural dimensionality'. It reveals once more the closeness between the artistic viewpoints of Lissitzky and Van Doesburg at this time. Both men would walk and talk together for hours at Weimar and in Berlin, and Lissitzky confided to Van Doesburg in a letter from Ambri-Sotto (in Tessin, Switzerland), ‘I am always interested in what you write to me about your theoretical work, both in those cases where our visions are very similar and, in particular, when we possess a different opinion.3 There is no doubt that several aspects of Van Doesburg's architectural programme represent reactions to Wright's theories. Specifically four of the points –One, Seven, Twelve and Fifteen – which reject former style-types and openings (windows, "doors and so forth) as passive moments, as well as symmetry and decoration, correspond to notions in Wright's In the Cause of Architecture.4 Van Doesburg's programme as a whole constituted an exchange of thought with, and a further development of, both Ausgeführte Bauten und Entwürfe,5 the book by Wright which most influenced European architecture, and Le Corbusier's Vers Une Architecture.6 Van Doesburg's Points Eight and Nine, rejecting an architecture of load-support and advocating mobile interior screens, were influenced by Le Corbusier, whereas his rejection in Point Twelve of standardization of housing was again opposed to views of both Le Corbusier and the Bauhaus. In an article published in the same week as the programme Van Doesburg illuminated the paradoxical claim that De Stijl architecture was ‘formless yet defined': ‘Indeed with a view to elemenary architecture we should rather speak of an a-style since this architecture goes beyond style. This is precisely what constitutes its style. In this new notion of an a-style, the two extremes formlessness and style are unified.'7 This statement in turn is a development of Wright's thoughts on style in Ausgeführte Bauten und Entwürfe. It must be pointed out that the De Stijl movement had never repudiated its debt to Wright nor its relationship to Cubism, and had in the meantime introduced a new phase of development in architecture by way of the models designed by Van Doesburg in collaboration with Van Eesteren (see p. l). As with these models, Van Doesburg's architectural programme posits a fundamentally new approach in so far as it deals with a four-dimensional architecture of a space-time quality. The relationship of this programme to his article The New Aesthetics and its Realization'. which was written in 1922 and already substituted the space-time view for Wright's approach, has been pointed out above\~(see p. 56). The impact of the Paris models was varied. The Schrder house built in Utrecht in 1924 by Rietveld.8 owes little to them. but their new use of colour, employing larger areas and thereby dealing with architecture as a whole, had a direct effect on J. J. P.Oud's café De Unie (1924/25) in Rotterdam.9 It is possible that through Lissitzky, the new De Stijl architecture exerted some influence on Kasimir Malevich. His isometric drawings produced around 1924¹º attempt to accentuate planar relationships, but nevertheless remain visualizations of an architecture of extended mass. While resembling Proun constructions, their treatment of space is superficial when compared to the Paris models. Later, when reproducing one of Malevich's models among the examples in architecture he considered to be influenced by De Stijl, Van Doesburg referred to them as pieces of fancy-architecture'.11 The appearance of his architectural programme was immediately succeeded by two related publications, ‘Towards Collective Construction'12 (p. 147), and $\mathbf { \bar { \Psi } } _ { - } \bigtriangledown + \mathbf { \Psi } = \mathbf { R _ { 4 } } ^ { , 1 3 }$ (p. 148). Both were written by Van Doesburg but published with Van Eesteren listed as co-author. Towards Collective Construction’(published in the magazines Bulletin de l’effort moderne, Pasmo and Stavba as well as De Stijl) contained a further attack on Purism's return to illusionism and the remarkable statement that the machine in art is another illusion. This statement was made in reaction to views adhered to by Moholy-Nagy, Gropius, Mies van der Rohe and Le Corbusier. Lissitzky also repudiated the machine in art in Nasci'.14 These articles furnish further examples that Van Doesburg and Lissitzky were united against Functionalism; they both critized it for its extravagant admiration for the machine and its belief that in the machine could be found the solution for architectural problems. The other article, $ { { ^ 6 } } - \bigsqcup + { { } = } { { \mathrm R } _ { 4 } } { } ^ { \prime }$ , comprises a description of the architectural studies by Van Doesburg and Van Eesteren placed under the ‘sign’of the fourth dimension. In the autumn Van Doesburg received an invitation from the City of Vienna to give a lecture, which he presented under the title ‘The Development of Modern Architecture in Holland'.1⁵ This lecture had been given earlier in Prague and Brno, as well as in Berlin at, the beginning of the year. In Vienna he met the architects P. Behrens and J. Hoffmann (incredibly enough, neither had he any acquaintance with Adolf Loos nor could any publication by the latter be found in Van Doesburg's library) and also became acquainted with F. Kiesler and his designs for the Vienna theatre and exhibition hall. Soon afterwards, Kiesler became a writer for De Stijl and published on methods for display as well as on architecture. In this year he had a book, Principles of Neo-plastic Art16 published at the Bauhaus. The text, in an excellent translation by Max Burchartz, was almost identical with the article of the same name which had been written between 1915 and 1918 and was first published in Dutch in 1919.17