## Van Doesburg's isolation in France Van Doesburg's articles ‘The End of Art' and ‘The End of Modernisms', discussed previously are strongly connected by a common tenet. AlthoughThe End of Modernism’restricted itself to Futurism, since it was to be continued at a later date, Van Doesburg peremptorily advocates the end of all art-isms and the fusion of art with life in ‘The End of Art'. However, the subtitle of ‘The end of Modernisms’ also mentions Constructivism, touching upon divergence of opinion which arose between Lissitzky and Van Doesburg this year and which would end their artistic relationship. Its immediate cause was the book The Isms of Art 1914–19241 published by El Lissitzky and Hans Arp. Van Doesburg's objections were directed chiefly against the incorrect dates Lissitzky gave in his book and in particular against the statement that Suprematism had begun in l913. Lissitzky extended the conflict in his article A. and angeometry'² (A' was an abbreviation for art) by stating once more that Malevich began the use of the square in 1913 and, in a footnote, that ‘the artists of De Stijl. when using Mondrian's principle in three-dimensional space, will turn into decorators'. This last remark, together with a statement in The Art Isms 1914–1924 that‘Proun is the station for change from painting to architecture', clearly reveals the competition between Lissitzky and Van Doesburg that developed after the latter had more fully realized the principles of his Neo-plastic painting in the Paris architectural models. Moreover, Van Doesburg's new architecture represented a visualization of the fourdimensional concept, opening up mass and leading to an architecture of space-time, much more than did either Malevich's architectural designs or Lissitzky's project for a skyscraper, both of which date from 1924 and maintained an architecture of mass. According to a note in Van Doesburg's handwriting in the margin of Lissitzky's article in the Europa-Almanach, Malevich started to use the Suprematist square only in 1918. He was correct in this assumption as far as Malevich's painting White on white was concerned, as is confirmed by Ludvig Hilberseimer in his introduction to Malevich's The Nonobjective World,³ a translation of Die Gegenstandslose Welt, published in 1927 at the Bauhaus. However, in this book Malevich himself presented several drawings using the Suprematist square in various compositional ways and carrying the date 1913. But Constantin Umansky in Neue Kunst in Russland 1914–1919.4 states that Suprematism came into being in Russia only in 1915 and that the immediately preceding years were devoted to a Cubist-Futurist phase.³ As he was the friend of many Russian artists and apparently, since he described himself as having also represented many of their administrative interests. some art officials feel he is the more reliable source. Apart from this disputed matter, the article ‘A. and Pangeometry' shares the demand fora switch from theintuitive to ascientific approach in art. Although he did not mention his name. Lissitzky made clear reference7 to his discussions with Van Doesburg on the fourth dimension in art. but criticized his use of it in his architectural models as ‘superficial'. In the same Europa-Almanach Van Doesburg's architecture was also attacked by Le Corbusierin‘The Change-overin Architecture'.8 While admitting that he had ‘breathed in the aesthetic directives for a contemporary architecture', Le Corbusier again rejected them in Functionalist terms with his remark that ‘a house is like a chest with many drawers', and argued that the main architectural problems were not to be solved by the aesthetician who was lost in fantasy and arbitrariness'. Finally, another criticism of Van Doesburg appeared in the Europa-Almanach, which, in fact, contained contributions from nearly all leading artists of the time except Van Doesburg. Oud contributed‘Yes and No',9 as a third attack upon the editor of De Stijl in that single publication, mainly with respect to his points on mannerism and propaganda. Meanwhile, Van Doesburg commenced a long series of articles on the renovation of architecture in various European countries. These articles, in Bouwbedrijf, possessed a neutral informative character, despite several paragraphs of a typically Van Doesburg tendentious lavour. His unpublished and inçomplete manuscript European Architecture1⁰ represents a condensed extract of the most significant statements from these articles and was intended as a short history of modern architecture. Writing apparently represented to Van Doesburg a means to compensate for the temporary lapse in his other activities. In the summer, during a stay at Belle-Ile-en-Mer (Morbihan), a bare and rocky island to which from this time on Van Doesburg regularly retreated because of increasing trouble with his hay fever, he completed The Other Face: An Abstract Surhumanistic Novel11 which had been published earlier as a series of aphorisms. This novel differs from his ‘Caminoscopy' in being less philosophical and more literary in intention and for reminding one of Dadaist as well as of Surrealist literature. According to Van Doesburg, it presents ‘a world of plastic form, of pure creation, in which the impossible becomes possible, a world without gravitation or space-temporal coordination'.12 Its content is related to Elementarism and to Surrealism, which share a common need to turn everything into spirituality. In De Stijl Van Doesburg published his last project in collaboration with Van Eesteren, which was the Design for a Shopping Centre'.13 Van Doesburg's role in this project was limited to the application of colour, and the architecture itself was entirely by Van Eesteren. The younger artist used this opportunity to show his preference for the general trend in modern architecture in abandoning the spacetime innovations of Van Doesburg. Van Eesteren's prize-winning project for the renovation of Unter den Linden in Berlin also dates from this year and equally demonstrates his return to an architecture of mass. From this point on Van Eesteren was to dedicate himself exclusively to town-planning, the first results of which were published in De Stijl. In August, under Jean Badovici's editorship, the Editions Albert Morancé in its series L'Architecture Vivante published a special issue dedicated to De Stijl. It was prefaced by a general introduction by Jean Badovici which was in actual fact an article by Van Doesburg rewritten and signed by Badovici, and the issue also contained articles by Mondrian and Van Doesburg on more specific topics. Mondrian's contribution had been written the year before under, ,the title Future Neo-plastic Architecture'14 and restated views expressed in his article ‘Neo-plasticism in Practice in a Far Future and in Contemporary Architecture', published in De Stijl in 1922. Mondrian thus continued to stress his view that architecture consists of a plurality of planes rather than of the prisms found in ‘massive building' concepts like those of Le Corbusier. Van Doesburg's ‘The Evolution of Modern Architecture in Holland'15 rejected Berlage's architecture for having the same mixture of gothic and classical elements he had criticized in Wright. Since De Stijl had always felt its indebtedness to Berlage, Van Doesburg's comment indicates that he considered his own architecture a definite progressive step. His architectural programme was also included in this issue of L'Architecture Vivante and had been expanded to seventeen points instead of the earlier sixteen published in De Stijl; the second half of Point Ten became Point Eleven, and stated that ‘The plastic aspect is obtained by the fourth dimension of space-time.' The fact that Van Doesburg isolated the aspect of space-time in architecture with his new Point Eleven, apart from explaining his comments on Berlage and Wright, makes it clear once more that he was fully conscious of his own contribution in bestowing architecture with a space-time quality. The expanded programme also included for the first time two drawings of three-dimenșional crosses called Tesseracts and intended as basic plastic forms, the one indicating a centripetal, the other a centrifugal movement. These illustrations are consequently of great importance in connection with the four-dimensional aspect of Van Doesburg's architecture. (See ill. on p. 145). The drawings are also of interest in reference to Kemeny's manifesto‘The Dynamic Principle'. This manifesto portrayed the spacetime continuum of the universe as its aboriginal function and viewed this mechanism as based on centrifugally and centripetally directed forces, which should be expressed by a mobile art. Van Doesburg's centrifugal and centripetal cross-like, basic plastic forms, in their staticodynamic existence, are intended as a reply to this purely physical view. In conformity with the new De Stijl architecture, they were meant to embody the ideal that man, in his art, expresses the dynamic vision of the universe without the physicality of actual motion. 1925 also saw the publication of the book Die Scheuche (The Scarecrow),16 a children's tale written by Kurt Schwitters, enriched by a typographical layout by Van Doesburg, and executed under the care of Käte Steinitz. In his typography Van Doesburg made playful use of typical Morris plant motives by rotating them forty-five degrees according to Elementarist principles, whereas the figures remind one of Lissitzky's collages built of matches.