## Articles Art criticism, modern art in the Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam, Exhibition Mondrian, Leo Gestel, ·Sluiters, Schelfhout, Le Fauconnier (Fragments coņcerning Mondrian) Mondrian. The works of this painter above all produce a most spiritual impression. They achieve this all the more because they are hung opposite the prismatic colourcompositions of Leo Gestel in the same room. The problem which Mondrian undertook to solve in nr. 116 was handled very successfully. This work spiritually dominates all others. It gives the impression of Repose; the repose of the soul. Its pre-determined structure embodies ‘becoming' rather than ‘being'. This represents a true element in art, for art is not ‘being' but ‘becoming'. The idea of ‘becoming' has been expressed in black and white; it derives from the theories of Picasso and Uexkuell. The first of these artists arrived at a metaphysical palette which reduced Luminist prismatic colour to white, black, grey and sepia. Through years of hard work my own experiences have led me, before I came to know the theories of Uexkuell or Picasso. to prefer the use of the white-black-grey palette in works of a purely spiritual content. The feeling I obtained from painting 116 was of a purely spiritual, almost religious character, which, however, possessed no zeal... . To reduce the artist's means to such a minimum and to produce an impression of pure art using only black paint on a white canvas and horizontal and vertical lines is most extraordinary. This work, however, should be hung separately. ## # 商 (above) Composition XIII, Still life 1918 oil on panel, 29.5 × 29.5 cm. (12 × 12 in.) Collection of Mrs J. J. P. Oud. Photo: L'Art en photographie I would like to draw attention to this kind of work. . . . The other works by Mondrian could be described as coloured architecture. Here too one colour emanates from another. The colours mutually influence each other. In some works the motives which inspired them can still be discerned, without, however. these becoming aesthetically disturbing (aesthetic' here is not used in its traditional meaning but in the sense of a ‘feeling for art’). These works, which produce an extraordinarily elementary or pure impression of art, remain