## Caminoscopy (Aldo Camini) An anti-philosophical view of life without any thread or system I A chapter without a head Electricity is my line. I despise Pascoli (Giovanni Pascoli, famous Îtalian poet of the old school). I pity Croce (Benedetto Croce, the famous Italian philosopher and aesthetician). In my belief, art, religion, philosophy, science and alcohol are all consequences of doubt. However, as soon as we face and conquer through conviction the errors upon which we have founded our lives we shall arrive at a new stage of life which will lead us towards the supremacy of being. I enjoy observing the automatic and careful movements of the somnambulist. These movements are visibly more assured than the consciously executed tick-tack of telegraph instruments, although the latter may succeed admirably in answering our need for the conquest of space and time. Those who think I am writing an apology for Futurism are wrong. I see life as conceived and described through me, and it impresses me as utterly astonishing that no straight line exists in the spaces of our realistic, anti-abstract thinking capacity. This shows me that no definite content exists for the basis of life. Consequently, a philosophy or a science which follows a systematic hypothesis is impractical. I therefore consider philosophy either absolute charlatanism or childishness. For fear of wandering from the only truth that interests me (i.e. life), I must let this train of thought slip into limbo. .. . Truth is not the whole of life, which is why all intellectual activities are fictitious. Thought never touches life, and everything described as ‘the purpose of life’ changes neither life nor ourselves. The mistake is obvious; professional thinkers and scientists always considered 'life' and ‘ourselves' as two different things, with our mind being considered a kind of trap and a hypothesis viewed as the bait with which life could be caught. However, we belong to life and each acknowledgement is ‘caught' by its negation. If we once study the amalgamations of metal which (by the contrast between dynamic and static) motorially exercise a power definable in numbers and acknowledge them as totally equivalent to our flesh and the wounds in our flesh, we shall no longer be able to differentiate between the functioning of our brains and that of a drilling machine. I never wondered about this like Papini, nor did I consider the mind a pit containing everyone and everything as does Gentile. De Stijl vol. 1v, 5, June 1921, pp. 66–7