## What is dada??????? You probably will be sceptical of learning something about dada from someone who is innocent of dada who is non-dadaist. Dada: the terror of the easy-chair bourgeois, of the art critic, of the artist, of the rabbit breeder, of the Hottentot, of everybody? A subject like this scarcely lends itself to serious lecturîng, and in fact I do not intend to do so. I shall be satisfied if, in fulfilling an obligation to friends, I succeed in throwing some light on the dada attitude towards life. This seems especially necessary in a country which since l880 has been immune to any new expression of life. Furthermore, it would be arrogant to suggest that I could make the mystery of Dada comprehensible on an intellectual level. This would be impossible, and even Dada itself did not achieve this. Dada is a face. Dada wants to be lived. Dada does not want to be understood intellectually. Dada rejects inexorably any logical the spiritual hereafter and the material here-and-now. Putting principles of aesthetics into material form creates an attitude towards life which annuls the divorce between reality and the hereafter. This plastic expression of life as a unity introduces a new civilization. Weimar 1922 De Stijl vol. vı, 1, March 1923, pp. 10–14 association of ideas. ‘Dada.'wrote Richard Huelsenbeck.‘has dipped its fingers in all philosophies of life. Dada is the dancer's spirit transcending all terrestial moralities. Dada is the great phenomenon which is parallel to the relativistic philosophies of the present period, Dada is not an axiom, Dada is an attitude of mind independent of schools and theories; it is concerned with the individual himself. without making him predominate. Dada cannot be fixed by laws.' The question continually put to dadaists, What is dada?', can as little be answered as other questions on other phenomena of life. The answer to the question, 'What is dada?', can only be given by spontaneous action. It is an error to think that dadaism belongs to the category of new art forms such as impressionism, futurism, cubism, expressionism and so forth. Dada is not a movement in art. Dada is an outlook on life, opposed to anything we imagine to be of vital importance. Dada does not ask questions anyway. Dada is the denial of the conventionalism of daily life. Dada is the strongest possible negation of any cultural evaluation. The true dadaist does not adopt anything, neither art, politics, philosophy nor religion. The dadaist considers all these signs of an obsolete pseudo-culture to be fraudulent trade-marks. Each brand is sold for as long as a new brand has not been discovered. Dada considers all the hypotheses that have distracted us from reality - whether called Tao or Om, Bramah, Jaweh, God, number or spirit – as simply different labels for one and the same manufacture, which ‘having developed from nought', is thrust upon humanity with much rah rah and boum boum. Dada denies any higher, spiritual content of life, art, religion, philosophy or politics. Dada is the most direct expression of our time as an amorphous era and wishes to be exactly this. To the dadaist the reason why this ballast exists is based on two things only: publicity and suggestion. According to the dadaist, humanity, due to fetishistic instinct, is inclined to blind itself with certain characteristic symbols. These serve as advertisements and, as such, are repeated many times, producing an ineffaceable impression: religion by a cross, Odol toothpaste by a curved bottle, Nietzsche by his big moustache, Oscar Wilde by his homosexuality, Tolstoy by his caftan and sandals! Dada does not want to convert. Dada is experienced enough to know that the masses can be won over to ‘anything', if only their atavistic instincts are influenced by suggestive publicity. Dada considers each dogma and each formula to represent a nail with which we try to hold together a dilapidated and sinking boat (our western culture). Dada does not strive for eternality. Dada has arrived at a fifty per cent‘agreement with the world'. Dada was first in exposing the fraud of everything, it has declared the world bankrupt. Dadaism could be called the supra-national expression of humanity's collective experience of life in the past ten years. Whatever remained latent in modern man is expressed in Dada. Dada always existed; however, it was discovered only in our own time. According to Raoul Hausmann, ‘the dadaist does not experience the world in a childish way; neither God, nor a father, nor a teacher can punish him. Dada is the practical depoisoning of the self – a modern European situation, anti-eastern, anti-oriental. unmagical. Dada is the germ of a new type of man: as opposed to the moralistic, Christian medieval burden of sin, Dada represents the negation of the present meaning of life or culture, which is not tragic but obsolete. Therefore the dadaist does not accept any responsibility whatsoever for our culture. The dadaist is familiar with all the premises and background of our culture, which to him represents ‘humanity and barbarism as one and the same expression'. He knows ‘all the ropes’ and ‘tricks’ relating to our most elementary interests in life. He knows exactly how mind is fabricated. Possessing a holy aversion to the ivory towers of our Great Men', he does not pretend to be an artist, a philosopher or a renovator. Free from the ambitious wish to be famous or to succeed socially, he is the freest, quietest, most even-tempered man in the world. Nevertheless, the dadaist credits man with a few positive values: the instinct to dominate and the mutual wish to devour. All ethical motives such as mercy, charity and pity are viewed by the dadaist simply as disguises which hide the true nature of man. Moreover. the dadaist agrees that ‘character' can have a positive value, which means that one can have progressed far enough to live and act without false pretexts and hidden motives. According to Richard Huelsenbeck, ‘Dada is based upon itself and acts for itself as does the sun when rising, or a tree when growing. The tree grows without wanting to grow. Dada does not give motives to its acts to serve an “end". Dada does not give birth to verbal abstractions, formulae or systems which it wants to apply to mankind. It is not in need of proof or justification, neither by formulae nor by systems. Dada in itself is the creative act. Dada eliminated the rigid and the rhythm of this time from its mind. Dada is of eminent importance to civilization but is also capable of seeing the limitation to its appearance in time, that is of relating itself to its time."