## II For the moment it is of little interest how. where and when this phenomenon of all phenomena which we call Dada came into being. Dada is rich in data. I could tell you about the first notorious performances in the Cabaret Voltaire in Zürich, the fights in the Gallery Dada, the great manifestations in New York, Paris and Berlin, the dada sermon of the so-called Oberdada in the Dome of Berlin, the dada demonstrations in a Roman Catholic church in Paris, which were kept secret by the press, and much more, but this does not bring you any closer to the essence of dada. Dada has neither country nor nationality. It appeared quite suddenly, due to a general need for spiritual self-purification, in several places far afield: America, Switzerland, France, Germany and elsewhere. Dada – the word does not mean anything and. as Hausmann remarked. Bébé. Šisi or Lollo' could have served just as well – did not stem from any a priori or other theory. It was born from a general resistance to our entire way of thinking. Dada expanded more or less from ‘nothing over a large but limited surface, carrying everything away and finally crystallizing in the negation of all pharmaceutical principles of life. The dadaists - amongst whom the most outstanding and intelligent people want to be counted nowadays (like Éinstein, Chaplin and Bergson)\* – declare in almost all manifestos that they do not want anything. nor know anything, nor are anything. DADA, Picabia writes, does not feel anything, it is nothing, nothing, nothing. Ît is like your hope: nothing. Like your idols: nothing. Like your paradise: nothing. Like your politicians: nothing. Like your heroes: nothing. Like your artists: nothing. Like your religions: nothing. Dada was not made, but came into being. One cannot become a DADAIST, one can only be one. During the first notorious days after its birth. the dadaists themselves did not entirelv understand what had brought them together. During this first period (about 1915), dadaism was of a predominantly aesthetic character. Graduallv this character was lost and finally even art itself was opposed. According to dada, art has value only as long as it can take advantage of the atavistic and fetishistic sentiments of man. According to the dadaists. art emanates from the need to get rid of these sentiments. However, this has not yet been accomplished. Dada considers the contemporary view of the world to be a product of the greatest possible contradiction and inconsistency, as the bankruptcy of the effort to explain life from a moralistic viewpoint. The efforts of Jesus, Buddha, Tolstoy and others have failed. Dada rejects any experiment to organize the infinitely variable, chaotic and heterogeneous mass called humanity. Dada denies evolution. Each movement evokes a counter-movement of equal force with the one cancelling the other. Nothing changes essentially. The world always remains as it was. Dada completely negates the generally acknowledged duality of matter and mind, woman and man, and in so doing creates the point of indifference', a point beyond man's understanding of time and space. For this reason Dada is able to mobilize the optical and dimensional static viewpoint which keeps us imprisoned in our (threedimensional) illusions. Thus it became possible to perceive the entire prism of the world instead of just one facet at a time. In this connection Dada is one of the strongest manifestations of the fourth dimension, transposed onto the subject. Dada allows the simultaneous negation of any affirmation, Dada is yes-no, a bird on four legs, a ladder without steps, a square without angles. Dada possesses as many positives as negatives. To think that Dada simply means destruction is to misunderstand life, of which Dada is the expression. To fight Dada means to fight oneself. Dada wants to annul the divorce of transcendental and everyday reality. Dada is the need of a view of reality of a united world, consisting of discordant and contrasting relationships. Dada does not see nature as the charming phenomenon we like to imagine, but as a smelling corpse, which spoils our spiritual pleasures and brings everything into immediate decav: everybody from the cleaning-woman to the artist (in essence one and the same person) fights against decay, or nature. I now want to quote the Dutch dadaist I. K. Bonset who expresses this poetically in his THE DRAMADE's HYPOSTRODON.