## The dramade's hypostrodon by I. K. Bonset. dadaistic meditations near a carrion. ## appeal to unnatural activities. it cannot be denied that we are diseased with convictions. No matter to what degree one is schizophrenic, tormented and adorned with mud frills, one thinks himself justified in living life. Observe, however, that ‘nature’ is a carrion; this is noticeable in le grand roue in Paris, the cornice of your house, the wrinkles of your bride and the good-natured balls of horsedung on the boulevard Saint Michel. THE DRAMADE'S HYPOSTRODON expresses itself in a floating and naked carrion. Any effort to create a new world of one's invention within a void, to live there unseen and untouched by the cancer of the NATURE DRAMADE, is doomed to fail. Anything that needs gestures and claims dimension space time and money, is filled with microbes which sooner or later will produce a reactive effect. One can never escape from the inimical counter-image of one's ‘spiritual' efforts (oh parody of the parade to paradise). Whether one is satisfying oneself with luke-warm baths (= poetry), with coloured tin pheasants (= religion), with a Medieval church-window in place of a pair of spectacles (= art), a seesaw in horizontal position (= philosophy) or with many other derivatives, the cancer in one's heart inevitably will expand. Hundreds of generations have slaved to exorcize this cancer, to conquer it or to limit it, while not noticing that their brains and the content of their aspirations are also poisoned with the same bacilli. Dada fights the tyranny of DIRT and thereby distinguishes itself from the impressionists, who had reconciled themselves to Dirt. Whole generations have inhaled eagerly the pernicious fumes of philosophy, religion and art believing the resulting katapepsis to represent the true condition of life. We neo-vitalists, dadaists, destructive constructivists have laid bare the entire abscess which hides the world's bodv by crying, ‘Look, look, look here here here nothing nothing nothing.' We feel that, without the policeman's truncheon raised above our heads, the leisure we enjoy would be disturbed. The thing we treasure most, dadasophy teaches, is our sleeping-powder. By using this powder carefully and regularly we do not notice that all life is adorned with mud-frills. No matter how thick the walls may be with which we exclude nature, after a lapse of time, any precision-product such as an elation from our spiritual desire, will be worn out katapeptically. DO YOU KNOW BY NOW WHAT IS ‘DADA'? What is dada??????? De Stijl, The Hague, 1923, pp. 3–14