## Towards plastic architecture 1 Form. The basis for a healthy development of architecture (and of art in general) is the suppression of all form-ideas insofar as this concept implies a predetermined type. Instead of using earlier style types as models and thus imitating previous historical styles, one necessarily must pose the problem of architecture entirely anew. 2 The new architecture is elementary, which signifies that it develops from the elements of construction as understood in the most comprehensive sense. These elements are for example, function, mass, plane, time, space, light, colour and material, and they are, moreover, also plastic elements. 3 The new architecture is economical, which signifies that the elementary means are organized either as efficiently and economically as possible or by wasting neither these means nor the material. 4 The new architecture is functional, which signifies that it develops from the precise determination of practical necessities which it embodies in a clear groundplan. clear, mutual relationships. A new plastic expression will emanate from the elementary means. Herein, the various arts will be so related as to provide a basis for the greatest possible power of (elementary) expression. ‘Material zur elementaren Gestaltung', G 1, July 1923 5 The new architecture is formless, yet defined, which signifies that it is not characterized byany predetermined aesthetic form-type or mould (like those used by pastry-cooks) into which it casts the functional spaces derived from practical living demands. In contrast to all earlier historical styles, the new architectural method imposes no standard or basic type. The division of functional spaces is strictly determined by rectangular planes which possess themselves no individual shapes, since, although defined (one plane by the other), they can be extended infinitely by the imagination. Thus they can create a coordinated system in which all points correspond to an equal number of points in universal, unlimited open space. It follows that the planes possess a direct relationship with open (exterior) space. 6 The new architecture has rendered the concept of the monumental independent of largeness and smallness (since the word ‘monumental' has been abused, it is replaced by the word ‘plastic'). This architecture has #

$$ I In close collaboration we have examined architecture as the plastic unity of all the arts (technology and industry excluded), and we have found that the result will be a new style. II We have examined the laws of space and their endless variations (specifically, space contrasts, space discords, complementary spaces and so forth), and we have discovered that all these various spaces can be organized physical illusions. The future, in fact, will witness the expression of a new dimension in the reality of three dimensions. This does not consist either of dynamics and statics and utility, or of art, composition and construction, but in the penetration of all elements in a newly created reality which is the basis for a general principle. Since 1916 the painters, architects, sculptors and others of the De Stijl movement in Holland, through practical experience have arrived at a definition and application of those laws which will lead to a new unity in life. Because of this new concept, which results from mutual collaboration, individual qualities in works of art will become obsolete. Only today can one imagine artists constructing a new way of life. The exhibition of the De Stijl group in the Salles de l'Effort Moderne (Leonce Rosenberg) in Paris aimed at demonstrating the possibility of collaborative creation according to these general principles. Theo van Doesburg and C. van Eesteren Paris. 1923 De Stijl, series x11, 6–7, 1924, pp. 89–91 into a balanced unity. III We have examined the laws of colour which operate in space and time, "and we have discovered that a balanced relationship among these elements results in a new and positive plastic construction. IV We have examined the relationship between space and time, and we have found that the plastic visualization of these two elements produces a new dimension through the use of colour. V We have examined the interrelationships among measure, proportion, space, time and material, and we have discovered a definite method constructing them as a unity. VI We have removed the duality of interior and exterior space through the destruction of enclosure (walls). VII We have given colour its true position