## Painting and plastic art: Elementarism Elementarism (fragment of a manifesto) Elementarism has been born partly in reaction to an over dogmatic and often narrow-minded application of Neo-plasticism, partly as its consequence but ultimately from what is primarily a radical correction of Neo-plastic ideas. I Elementarism rejects the demands of pure statics which lead to sterility and to the laming of creative potentialities. Instead of ’denying Time and Space, Elementarism acknowledges these elements to be the most elementary means for creating a new plastic expression. Just as Elementarism attempts to bring both elements, statics and dynamics (rest and movement) into a balanced relationship, so it also attempts to combine these two elementary means within a new dimension. In contrast to the Neo-plastic manner of expression, which is restricted to two dimensions (the plane), Elementarism acknowledges a form of plastic expression in four dimensions, the realm of space-time. In opposition to the orthogonal style of plastic expression, which is homogeneous with natural construction, Elementarism postulates a heterogeneous, contrasting, unstable manner of plastic expression based upon planes oblique in relation to the static, perpendicular axis of gravitation. If Neo-plasticism introduced new ways of eliminating the compositional centre, Elementarism completely renovates our optical impressions, does not permit the work of art to consist of a left and a right half and radically destroys classical, optical frontalism in painting. Although all human physical movement may be based upon the horizontal and the vertical, it is, in fact, only an accentuation of our physique, of the natural structure and functions of the organism, if the work of art intensifies this dualism of nature in our consciousness, even if in a manner appropriate to art. After Neo-plasticism rejected symmetry because of its association with our external. physical structure (and rightly so), it should also have rejected the orthogonal because of its association with our physical, organic structure as the exclusively practicable manner of expression. This is precisely what is being done by Elementarism, which, through the suppression of rigid statics, evokes in us a new spiritual emotion that goes with the new optics. Elementarism is therefore the purest and most direct manner of expressing the human spirit, since it is bound neither to the left nor the right, to symmetry nor to statics and is based on neither the horizontal nor the vertical alone, but is always revolting against and contrasting with nature. II The method of construction in Elementarism is based on neutralizing the positive and the negative through the use of the oblique and, in relation to colour, through dependence on the discord. Balanced relationship is not its final goal. Elementarism rejects arrangements of colours which accord with one another and each with the whole (the classical notion of composition!) Elementarism acknowledges colour as matter and independent energy. III Elementarism rejects all artificial value and postulates the counter-value instead, which is to say, the variation opposing the invariable, the discord opposing the contrast, and, finally, combined lines and materials. In opposition to the composition of balanced relationship in Neo-plasticism, Elementarism postulates unbalanced counter-composition, which is a phenomenon of temporal-spatial tension in colour, line or plane and always in opposition to natural and architectural structure. Elementarism entirely rules out architecture as an art. Èxperience and research over the years have shown art and architecture to represent two completely different and incompatible entities. Elementarism consciously strives for the end of applied art and is hostile towards all decorative application of the new principles. The basics of Elementarism, whenever applied to architecture, produce an architecture free from any aesthetic intention. IV Elementarism is directed not only at Art, Architecture and Design, but also concerned with man and his joy in life and the community. It seeks to provoke and strengthen the revolutionary spirit of the coming generations and counts on a larger group of younger people for the collective realization of a truly inner renovation of human attitude. This stimulation, since it is much more psychological than political, demands heroic spontaneity. Elementarism which is undertaken as psychological stimulation is called profoundism. Renovations in art during the last twenty years have not prevented the individual and the community from concerning themselves solelv with material interests. Material (natural) prosperity for the individual and the community was and still is used as mankind's criterion for success. Entirely different means than art can provide are needed to release man from his debased condition (which is supported by religion) and to lead him towards a new optimistic notion of life. Elementarism offers these means and sympathizes with all those movements (even those which advocate different principles in art) which make sacrifices to achieve this renovation, liberation and broadening of our notion of life. The growing need to experience reality is not to be confused with an increasingly materialistic view of life. The experiencing of reality can be seen as resulting from the old and almost entirely obsolete belief in a dualism between matter and mind. Matter and mind are in essence qualitative ideas similar to those of the positive-negative, velocity-inertia and active-passive polarities. In the experience of reality as set forth here, these qualitative ideas are neutralized and presumed to be a unity. Whether or not this experience of reality is ‘abstract' is, from an Elementarist point of view, a technical question and, in fact, a matter of secondary importance, at least to the Elementarist. Since he regards universal movement (not to be confused with actual motion) as the cause of multiple relativity, matter and mind, reality and supra-reality and abstract and concrete represent nothing but formulae, which the development of consciousness in the thought process has established and which exist at this very moment. This thought process, or this development of consciousness, is the sole reliable manifestion of polydimensional movement. ‘Objective' and ‘subjective' belong equally to the type of notion Elementarism has abandoned. Elementarism begins where philosophy and religion leave off. As spontaneous, vital manifestations of consciousness. the latter disciplines have become sterile and obsolete. Each individual consciousness requires intellectual instead of perceptual activity. The Elementarist flatly denies all objective activity; he knows that everything became, becomes and will become real through subjective recognition. Feeling (art), labour and intellect were the three vehicles of consciousness. The artist's notion of life was based on an emotion, that of proletarians on labour and that of intellectuals on analysing intellect. The great struggle which began with Elementarism consists in the complete destruction of the illusionistic view of life in all its aspects (which include the predominance of religion, nature and art) and, simultaneously, the reconstruction of an elementary world of reality full of beauty and precision. It is the task of Elementarism to demolish one by one those decorative reliefs which veil our image of the world such as the remnants of religion and of all other traditional forms. The Elementarist is a spiritual rebel, an agitator who sacrifices his own tranquillity and who intentionally disturbs the peace, the regularity and routine, of bourgeois life. He does not abandon form on a piece of canvas measuring a half yard square; rather, he unrelentingly abandons form on the gigantic plane of human tragedy. He understands that man is a tragic animal who lives only in terms of tradition, conservatism and the constant repetition of everyday routine. He comprehends this situation, this form of mercy seeking, as based upon one or another delusion which is variously called religion, duty or honour. If one abandons this delusion. one destroys at the same time the possibility of life for the bourgeoisie and even for those who think themselves above such delusion. The Elementarist recognizes that all the various styles of life are temporal, relative and transitory, and of interest more as a phenomenon of fermentation than of culture. A new cultural phenomenon, however, was the discovery that ideas such as spirit, body and soul do not express any essential quality of life and that such characterizations of consciousness no longer possess any essential elementary value. Elementarism advocates the complete destruction of traditional absolutism regardless of the guise in which it appears (the nonsense of rigid oppositions like those of man and woman, man and god, good and bad and so forth). The Elementarist considers life a vast infinity wherein such polar characteristics as these continually interchange. Absolute differences are merely mental, symbolic and imaginary concepts, which are entirelv neutralized and unified through reality. In opposition to this