# Psychotherapy: The Patient as a Universe of One The Context of Psychotherapeutic Practice At the turn of the century, psychiatry held a rather obscure and tenuous position among the medical specialties. Psychiatrists concerned themselves for the most part with the treatment of the insane. They had little to do with the psychological troubles of ordinary people, who might turn in their distress to religion, to the popular philosophy of moral uplift, or to a variety of sects and cults of the mind. Psychiatry made a very faint claim to a basis in scientific knowledge. By the end of World War II, however, psychiatry had become a powerful force in American society, had extended its reach beyond the asylum and had made serious inroads into provinces that once belonged to religion or popular philosophy. Indeed, psychiatry itself had become a new popular philosophy, at least for the affluent middle classes—so much that Dr. Norman Zinberg, writing in the Daedalus volume on the professions in the early 196os, could complain that psychiatry's popular appeal had created excessive expectations for it and made the psychiatrist an object of suspicion to his medical colleagues.1 Although this transformation had been due in no small measure to the phenomenal rise in American life of one kind of psychiatry, psychoanalysis, the whole field had become, in Leston Havens's term, a babble of many voices. At first, psychiatrists who identified themselves with medicine sought to protect themselves against the incursions of non-physicians such as clinical psychologists. After World War II, however, the field spilled over the boundaries of medicine and a plethora of psychotherapies began to make their claims. Within psychiatry proper, Havens has described four main schools: objectivedescriptive psychiatry, psychoanalysis, interpersonal psychiatry, and existential psychiatry.² In the larger therapeutic universe, there are also various sorts of group therapy, family therapy, operant conditioning, Rogerian therapy, Gestalt therapy, short-term therapy, and transactional analysis, to name only a few of the more prominent voices. The fragmentation of the field provoked several kinds of response. Psychoanalysts tried to preserve their special status. Psychiatrists who wanted to keep close to medical science were attracted by advances in psychopharmacology. Representatives of different schools of therapy debated and competed more or less openly with one another. Some professional schools chose to specialize in a particular approach to therapy, while others offered a supermarket of approaches among which students were expected to choose. At the same time, there were important changes under way in the larger societal context of therapeutic practice. Mental hospitals came under severe public criticism as “snakepits" and "dumping grounds," and sociologists offered damaging accounts of the techniques of labelling and social control by which psychiatrists fostered the social role of the mentally ill. These critical trends provided ammunition for the Mental Health Act of 1964, which set out a legislative basis for depopulating mental hospitals and de-institutionalizing the care of the mentally ill. Many community mental health centers alligned themselves with the growing interest in preventive services. In the full flush of the 196os, some psychiatrists openly turned against their profession and devoted themselves to community organization. In the period between 1965 and 1981, the questioning of therapeutic effectiveness has taken legislative form. Congress has demanded proof of effectiveness as a condition for thirdparty payments to practitioners. The de-institutionalization of the mental hospitals has continued, spurred on by public concerns over the cost of hospital care. Psychoanalysis appears to have lost some of its hold on the field, as clinical psychology has become stronger and new professionals, such as social workers, have moved into therapeutic roles. The babble of contending schools of therapy continues, apparently without damage to popular acceptance of psychotherapy, which has grown from a treatment for the seriously ill or a luxury for the well-to-do, to more or less standard fare for people in all walks of life. Among the representatives of the competing schools of therapy, many continue to defend their exclusive claims and leave to the student or the client the difficult task of choosing among them. But there have been other approaches to the predicament posed by therapeutic pluralism. Havens has tried to describe what therapists of various schools actually do, by treating the schools as sources of therapeutic techniques appropriate to different sorts of patients and problems. Other writers have tried to describe fundamental processes of inquiry shared by therapists of various schools. Some practitioners, for example, share a disposition to regard the patient as a unique case—in Erik Erikson's words, "a universe of one." These practitioners, however much they may differ from one another in language and technique, share an approach to therapy that distinguishes them from those who regard patients as examples of standard diagnostic categories. The practitioners of the unique case are of special interest from the point of view of the study of reflection-in-action. In the following pages, I will describe and analyze an interaction between a psychiatric resident and his supervisor. I have again selected an incident from professional education where a practitioner's reflection-in-action is more likely to be made public than it is in ordinary practice. I have chosen a practitioner who takes a psychoanalytical point of view, while recognizing that a protocol drawn from the work of Carl Rogers, Fritz Perls, or Salvador Minuchin might have produced a very different set of materials for analysis. It seems to me, nevertheless, that therapists, who are in other respects very different from one another must still frame the problem of the particular patient, construct and test interpretations of his behavior, and design interventions aimed at helping him. The supervisor, in the case that follows, goes about his business in a manner peculiar to his underlying model of therapy, but the generality of his tasks links his inquiry to other therapies of the unique case. ## The Supervisory Session The therapist is a third-year resident in psychiatry. His current supervisor, a psychoanalyst, is one of some sixty supervisors with whom he has met in the course of his three-year training program. The resident sees his current supervisor for one half-hour every week, averaging one supervisory session for every seven or eight sessions with the patient. Because the resident has been troubled by his relations with this supervisor, he has agreed to tape-record the session and then to discuss the resulting protocol,3 hoping to learn from reflection on the record of the meeting. He begins by informing the supervisor that his patient, a young woman, has returned to therapy after a hiatus of several months. R: She had decided that she wasn't getting anywhere in therapy, and I agreed somewhat that the same issues were coming up again and again—and primarily that issue of her getting stuck in the relationship with the man she had been seeing four or five years at that time, and advances on her part were matched by his withdrawal, and vice versa. ## The Supervisor asks, In what way did she get stuck with you, I mean, in terms of the same way she got stuck in the relationship? R: Well, she tended to feel that any insights led to very little change, and we both noticed that even though she saw the pattern of her relationship outside of the therapy, it didn't do much good in her life . . . and it was difficult for her to really get emotionally involved in the therapy itself, that she was . . . quite guarded about talking about her past sadnesses and disappointments about them. The Supervisor asks whether that was also a problem in her relationship with her boyfriend. R: Yes, she tended to restrict the feelings that she had in that relationship, especially the affectionate ones . . . and the sad ones. ## Summarizing, the Supervisor observes, So here she rather quickly brings into the relationship that she's having difficulty and can't express her feelings . . . she's stuck, that she feels somewhat—maybe lowered self-esteem because she's stuck. ## Then he asks, Did you at any time tell her that it's not surprising that what she experienced in her other relationships is experienced with you, and that here you have the advantage of looking at how she gets stuck and trying to work it out together . . . ? The Resident answers with a rather perfunctory affirmative: Yeah, that was part of the work . . . He goes on to describe the conditions of his patient's re-entry into therapy, the negotiation of fees and times of appointments, and begins to reflect on these early sessions: [What] has remained really paramount in her mind is wanting something, someone to rely on . . . sort of a constant object. Maybe in a way I've sort of served as that just by being available. She, during the first several sessions, repeated a lot of the pattern in the therapy that she had originally come in with in terms of feeling . . . very stuck . . . s: (interrupts) What does she mean when she says stuck? What's your experience? This question stimulates the Resident to produce a long example, which the Supervisor probes with further questions. R: Well . . . there's very much a pattern of her coming in and telling me about a fight she has had . . . often around some kind of misunderstanding. For instance, about the third session, she was saying that they went up to their old haunt . . . During the visit up there, he asked her whether or not a certain woman had called her. And this woman was a mutual friend, mostly a friend of his . . . And the patient thought that this woman had been spending some time with her boy friend. In fact, she knew that they had been together . .. s: (interrupts) What do you mean, "been together"? R: That they had just visited together . . . She had some suspicions. . . . And she said that they fought the rest of the time, mainly over the suspicions she had. Which has been one of their themes. That he goes out with other women and that she can't stand that. And he's not willing to stop. And she's not willing to lay down what she will and will not accept. And so she feels hurt and angry and suspicious when he's with any other woman. Meanwhile, he doesn't like it at all when she goes out with other men. s: Does she go out with other men? R: She doesn't, no . . . but that particular night, they fought the whole night. He took her to a restaurant and she said, "He knows I don't like lobster." He ordered her meal, which was lobster. s: What do you mean, he ordered her meal? You mean she was sitting there and doesn't say anything? R: Yeah, I mean he takes control in many situations. S: Did you ask her, I mean, how does that happen? If you don't like lobster, did you manage while sitting at the table to order something else yourself? R: Well, in the past, she said that if she argues with him, there'll be a fight. And it is very painful. Either she has to go along with him . . . and there isn't a fight. Or she argues and objects, and there is a fight. And she feels she loses either way. If there's a fight, she invariably loses the fight. s: How does she lose the fight? R: Well, it seems that mostly it's because she feels terrible when the fight's over. That he attacks her in the fight with many ways he thinks she is inadequate . . . She feels worse. And then the other part of it is she's not willing to risk a total severing of the relationship. There have been a number of times now, when she's told him she'll never call him again. And she doesn't want him to call her. And usually after a month, she'll relent . . . The Supervisor asks then Well, what's your understanding of why it's this way? Do you have some sense of what the conflicts are? The Resident responds with new anecdotes, but the Supervisor continues to press for an explanation. S: You know, I don't get a sense of what you feel from seeing her. How would you characterize her problems in your own mind, psychodynamically? . . . We don't know a lot about her, but what does the material suggest? R: Well, at this point there are a couple of suspicions. s: All right, hypotheses R: One is that she has a lot of trouble getting emotionally involved, especially with men . . . What's it do to her? R: I can only suspect that she's very fearful of what it's going to mean in terms of her own autonomy, in terms of her own ability to make decisions and choices. And in terms of her identity. When she gets very close, in this particular relationship especially, she loses a sense of herself. She has to define herself by the other person. S: Why does she do that? Do you think because she has some basic problems with who's who? Or is it at some other level? R: Well, I think she has enough ego capacity that when she's not deeply involved, that she does have a sense of herself . . . But when she gets very close and very dependent on someone, which is her longing very much, the boundaries break down . . . The Supervisor now offers a hypothesis of his own: S: You may be right . . . you know her better than I do, we'd have to wait and see. My own sense of it is that she's very disturbed at her own aggression. That she can't assert herself. And yet she can't even mail a letter for herself. You know, she becomes dependent, and when you say, "Well, why do you do it that way . . . end up eating lobster when you don't like it?" she says, "Well, what can I do?" And then she says "If it leads to an argument, then I feel very guilty."And she's guilty, and part of her guilt is accepting as reality all of the criticisms that her boyfriend levels at her . . He urges the Resident to use this hypothesis in the therapy: I would try to get her curious about it. Say, "Look, you seem able to assert yourself and you get what you want [which the Resident, trying to qualify the Supervisor's hypothesis, had just argued was the case in the patient's school and work] but in this particular area you do seem to be stunted."But I think that her fear of being aggressive and asserting herself is at least in part based on her fear of separation which is . . . that she's going to be left . . . and that she can't somehow take care of herself. The Resident plunges at this point into new material drawn from the patient's history: her relationship with an alcoholic father, her anger at her mother for driving the father away, her recognition that her present relationship is very similar to the relationship with her father, her early marriage which was "subordinate, in a way, but unexciting." This leads him to a new interpretation: R: This is the other theme, that she feels a little dead. She feels lifeless, without conflict. Something has to be going on out there between her and someone else in a conflictual way. S: Yeah, I'm not . . . It may be that she feels dead. I don't know yet . . . The Supervisor refrains from joining the Resident's excursion into the patient's history and avoids committing himself to the new hypothesis. Instead, he returns to the present story of the patient's relationship with her boyfriend (illuminated, perhaps, by comparison with her "unexciting"marriage), and offers a new interpretation of his own: The man who's nice doesn't interest her. In order for the man to be exciting, they have to be a bit of a bastard. This leads the Resident to speculate that indeed the patient may have left therapy the first time because he was "too much of a nice guy."When she wanted to return, he had become more "hardnosed," demanding that she pay more money perhaps, as the Supervisor then says, "becoming the bastard who she likes and expects you to be," or that you might turn into him sometimes, or that you might be struggling and ineffective. And I would look for signs of one or the other developing in the relationship. But you see, you have to ask yourself, "Is this all a way in which she can't be satisfied because she feels so guilty about it?" ## The Supervisor then returns to his earlier line of thought: She constantly keeps herself frustrated . . . well, anyone who constantly keeps themselves frustrated, you have to wonder whether they are in love with frustration in some way . . . or that because they're guilty about getting something for themselves that they have to constantly put roadblocks in the way. I don't know if the two are mutually exclusive but I think she's someone who really ## Psychotherapy: The Patient as a Universe of One R: I think they go together somewhat. s: Yeah, yeah, yeah. R: I mean, if she feels guilty, she wants punishment. s: Yeah. R: Not only does she not want pleasure. ## The Supervisor opens up a new line of inquiry. S: What does she want punishment for? For her agressive angry thoughts, her sexual wishes? You'd have to look and see whether these arguments interfere with their sexual life R: At times they stimulate it, too. s: I see. R: At times, they both get mutually stimulated. S: If she is punished, then she can enjoy, or if she enjoys, then she needs to be punished, or something. I would see this as a woman who really feels quite guilty. R: Um. S: About what, we have to decide . . . and really has without knowing it constantly thwarted her ability to be satisfied, and that's where she's stuck. ## The Resident offers a proposal: I posit her guilt might be her identification with her mother. She's angry at her mother for driving her father away. How much does she feel that she's responsible? ## But the Supervisor cautions against leaping beyond the evidence: Yeah, well, we don't know . . . It's too early to know all of these things. and he suggests that they now review the patient's history: Well, it might be helpful at this point to go over the history, to get some sense of the context. As the Resident continues to speculate on the patient's feelings of guilt, the Supervisor counters, I think if we can get some sense of this woman's frustration, and of the way in which she continues to frustrate herself . . And in his parting comment, he redirects the Resident's attention to his relationship with the patient: R: She made a comment something like, "Is that the theory now?" s: Yet, yeah . . . she will find ways of distancing you, just like she does her boyfriend. ## Therapeutic Knowledge-in-Practice Erik Erikson has described the psychotherapist's task as one of listening to the patient's complaint, eliciting its history, and making, testing, and delivering interpretations of the patient's data. The main questions of therapy have to do with the reliability of interpretation: In what way can the psychological clinician make his own perceptions and thought reliable, in the face of the patient's purely verbal and social expression, and in the absence of non-verbal supportive instruments?4 For Erikson, this is not a matter of objective knowledge but of "disciplined subjectivity."5 It derives from a reciprocal obligation in which the patient must verbalize everything and the analyst, in order to discover the patient's unconscious and refrain from imposing unconscious assumptions of his own, must listen in a special way, waiting for the gradual emergence of the themes which signal the patient's message. The material ought not to be subsumed under existing categories. The patient is “a ‘series of one' who must be understood in terms of the unique experiences of his life."6 The analyst must "set aside all preconceptions, listening afresh and testing the explanations as they arise."7 Emergent interpretations are to be tested first for their plausibility and then for their utility in intervention. Erikson observes that the clinician has no right to test his reconstructions until his trial formulations have combined into a comprehensive interpretation which feels right to him, and which promises, when appropriately verbalized, to feel right to the patient.8 Then, and only then, the clinician usually finds himself compelled to speak, in order to help the patient in verbalizing his affects and images in a more communicative manner, and to communicate his own impressions.9 The correctness of an interpretation does not always lie in the patient's "immediate assent," but rather in the way in which the communication between patient and therapist “keeps moving," leading to new and surprising insights and to the patient's greater assumption of responsibility for himself. 10 In the testing of interpretations and, indeed, in the entire interpretive inquiry, Erikson gives a special place to the phenomenon' of transference. The patient has “an interest in repeating the past in the present" which leads him to transfer “messages from other life situations" to the therapeutic one.11 This interest may prevent the patient from cooperating with the associative procedure. The analyst's interpretation may free the patient to cooperate, but only if the analyst detects and interprets the countertransferences which would prevent him from listening in the recommended way. What is most important about the transference is that through it, the patient brings into therapy meanings, unconscious motivations, and strategies of behavior which can be surfaced and examined, harnessing to the work of therapeutic inquiry his interest in repeating the past in the present. In the protocol we have examined, the Supervisor lives out the main lines of Erikson's description of therapeutic practice. As he listens to the Resident's reconstruction of his patient's material, he builds and tests interpretations. Because he encounters the patient only through the Resident's stories, he does not exhibit the analyst's special way of listening nor enter into the reciprocal obligation with the patient. But he advises the Resident how to do these things and, especially, how to make use of the phenomenon of the transference. At the very beginning of the session, when the Resident describes his patient as stuck in her relationship with her boyfriend and "getting nowhere in therapy,"the Supervisor asks, In what way did she get stuck with you, I mean, in terms of the same way she got stuck in the relationship? With this slight change in the question, the Supervisor restructures the puzzle. Centering attention on the connection between "stuck in the relationship" and "stuck with you," he anchors the inquiry in the patient's transference, where the relationship between patient and therapist can serve as a window on the patient's life outside therapy. So restructured, the question lends itself to a method of investigation which the Supervisor knows how to pursue. It motivates and guides his further questioning and inference. Accordingly, he turns immediately to the Resident's experience of what the patient means when she says she is stuck. He intends to elicit data about the patient's meanings, and these are forthcoming. But he does not listen passively to the Resident's reports of his patient's stories. He probes them actively. Following the story of the patient's fight with her boyfriend, for example, he asks, "What do you mean, 'been together'?" "Does she go out with other men?" "What do you mean, he ordered her meal?" "How does she lose the fight?" These questions suggest an origin in the Supervisor's image of the sorts of stories which would throw light on the way in which the patient is stuck. The incident of the boyfriend ordering the patient's meal contributes to an emerging picture of the patient's passivity and dependence. The Supervisor's "How come?" leads the Resident to describe the patient's dilemma: she feels she loses whether she goes along with her boyfriend's demands or resists them. The Supervisor's "How does she lose the fight?" induces the Resident to describe the patient's fears of feeling terrible after such fights, her anxiety, that she will be abandoned, her feelings of inadequacy about herself. Such questions suggest a repertoire of meanings and psychodynamic patterns accessible to the Supervisor, but apparently not to the Resident. The Supervisor uses his repertoire to pursue the development of stories until he finds them ready for interpretation. When they reach this stage of development, he stòps probing and shifts, rather abruptly, to a search for explanations: Well, what's your understanding of why it's this way? Do you have some sense of what the conflicts are? With this, he not only asks for an explanation but indicates the domain in which to look for it. The story of the patient's fight with her boyfriend has revealed a dilemma rooted in conflicts the patient cannot resolve. When the Resident responds by telling more stories about the patient's earlier life, the Supervisor brings him back to the search for interpretation: You know, I don't get a sense of what you feel from seeing her. How would you characterize her problems in your own mind, psychodynamically? Now the Resident attempts an explanation, an account of the patient's trouble in getting emotionally involved, "especially with men." This the Supervisor brushes aside. He has an explanation of his own: My own sense of it is that she's very disturbed at her own aggression. That she can't assert herself. As he develops this alternative, the Supervisor demonstrates a particular way of drawing interpretations from the data of the stories: And yet she can't even mail a letter for herself. You know, she becomes dependent, and when you say, "Well, why do you do it that way, end up eating lobster when you don't even like it?"she says, "Well, what can I do?" And then she says, "If it leads to an argument, then I feel very guilty." And she's guilty, and part of her guilt is accepting as reality all of the criticisms that her boyfriend levels at her. This passage moves gradually through a chain of inferences. From the fact that the patient allows her boyfriend to mail her letters and order her meals, it follows that she is unable to assert herself. She becomes dependent. Given her dependence, an argument with her boyfriend causes her to feel guilty. (The Resident's "feeling terrible" has become "feeling guilty.") The Supervisor has now linked her dependency to her feelings of inadequacy and guilt, and these, to her tendency to accept all of her boyfriend's criticisms as reality. In this condensed explanation, the Supervisor pulls scattered bits of information together, grounding each partial interpretation in a piece of evidence drawn from the Resident's account of his patient's stories. In contrast, the Resident leaps to such interpretations as "the shaky boundaries of the self,""the feeling of deadness," and the "feeling of responsibility for the father's leaving," without basing them on the patient's material and without the benefit of a careful progression of questioning and testing. To each of the Resident's interpretive leaps, the Supervisor responds, "I don't know yet . . . we have to wait and see." The Supervisor's gradual construction of an interpretation proceeds with his observation that "the man who's nice doesn't interest her." This leads to “for the man to be exciting, they have to be a bit of a bastard," and then to "she constantly keeps herself frustrated."But constant self-frustration demands an explanation. The Supervisor suggests two alternatives: well, anyone who constantly keeps herself frustrated, you have to wonder whether they are in love with frustration in some way . . . or that because they're guilty about getting something for themselves that they have to constantly put roadblocks in the way. Both of these explanations can go together, says the Resident, and the Supervisor agrees. "If she feels guilty, she wants punishment." Guilt can lead her to seek punishment which she then finds gratifying. But punishment for what? Again there are two possibilities, "agressive, angry thoughts"or "sexual wishes." In order to decide between these alternatives, the Supervisor conducts an experiment. He asks whether the punishing fights interfere with the patient's sex life with her boyfriend. On being informed that they sometimes stimulate it, he infers that punishment responds to sexual wishes, and he offers a new synthesis: If she is punished, then she can enjoy, or if she enjoys, then she needs to be punished, or something. I would see this as a woman who really feels quite guilty . . . about what, we have to decide . . . and really has without knowing it constantly thwarted her ability to be satisfied, and that's where she's stuck. The repeated "really" suggests a coming-to-rest, as though the Supervisor were now satisfied that his initial question has been answered. He has constructed an interpretation which explains how she is stuck in the relationship with her boyfriend, and he proceeds to show how this interpretation also explains how she is stuck in therapy. He does this by inviting the Resident to reflect on the ways in which he finds himself becoming the person his patient wants and needs him to be: You begin to review being the bastard who she likes and expects you to be, in her own view, to struggle with and to be excited by, but not to be satisfied by . . . or that you might turn into him sometimes, or that you might be struggling and ineffective. And I would ## Psychotherapy: The Patient as a Universe of One look for signs of one or the other developing in the relationship. But you see, you have to ask yourself, "Is this all a way in which she can't be satisfied because she feels so guilty about it?" This interpretation, which connects the two senses in which the patient is stuck, also suggests a strategy of intervention. The Resident should observe how he is being drawn into the patient's transference. Rather than colluding in his process, he should suggest to her that what she experiences in her relationships is experienced with you, and that here you have the advantage of looking at how she gets stuck and trying to work it out together. The Resident should get the patient interested in the puzzle of her self-frustration: I would try to get her curious about it. Say, "Look, you seem able to assert yourself and get what you want, but in this particular area you do seem to be stunted." These interventions would test the utility of the interpretation whose plausibility the Supervisor has established through a chain of interpretive inference. It would do so by involving the patient in an inquiry similar to the one the Supervisor and Resident have just undertaken. The new interpretation will be affirmed if the patient finds it compelling. But the hypothesis testing is also a therapeutic intervention. As therapist and patient "look at how she gets stuck and try to work it out together,"they will discover how she has recreated in therapy the most troubling features of her life outside of therapy. In spite of his suggested strategy of intervention, the Supervisor holds his interpretation loosely. When the Resident leaps to an explanation of the patient's guilt, the Supervisor cautions, "Well, we don't know yet. It's too early to know all of these things."Instead, he returns to the general observation with which his earlier chain of inference began: I think if we can get some sense of this woman's frustration, and of the way in which she continues to frustrate herself . . Having constructed and tested a solution to the puzzle, the Supervisor means to keep it open to further inquiry. The Resident should use the tentative solution to guide his work with the patient, but he should keep the puzzle alive. Throughout the entire dialogue with the Resident, the Supervisor has been demonstrating a reflective conversation with the patient's material. He has reframed the problem of the patient in such a way as to locate it squarely in the transference: the puzzle is to explain how the patient is stuck in the therapy as she is stuck in her relationship with her boyfriend. In the subsequent puzzle solving, two streams of data must be integrated. A sense must be found which links the patient's stories of her life experience with the Resident's experience of the patient in therapy. The two kinds of data are accumulated gradually and the Supervisor probes and develops them until the precipitate of an interpretation seems ready to form. The interpretive process proceeds step by step. Beginning with generalized observations only one step removed from the language of the stories, the Supervisor builds a chain of inferences in which each link is grounded in themes drawn from the patient's experience. He joins these together in an explanation which connects the patient's recurrent dilemma to a generalized account of inner conflicts. This explanation leads the Supervisor to a further question (punishment for what?) which generates alternative hypotheses. In order to discriminate between these, he conducts a crucial experiment in the form of a question. With the answer in hand, he proposes an interpretive synthesis which explains the material of the patient's stories, and he extends it to account for the patient's continual self-frustration in therapy. At this point, when he has given a plausible account of the two ways in which the patient is stuck, he proposes an intervention designed to test his account. The Resident should try to get the patient interested in her continual self-frustration, engaging her in a conscious use of the transference to gain insight into her life outside of therapy. What does the Resident make of this demonstration? After listening to the tape recording of this session, he complains that the Supervisor was not telling him what he wanted to hear. Then, upon reflection, he adds that he was not asking for what he wanted to know. He doubts that the Supervisor is an effective role model for him. He wants more help than he is getting, but feels angry when he asks for it. He senses that the Supervisor has formed a negative judgment about him which has never been expressed, and he seeks to explain his troubles with the Supervisor in terms of conflicting approaches to psychotherapy: "He is more psychoanalytic, while I deal more with conscious phenomena."Yet he displays in the protocol an eagerness to join, indeed, to compete with, the Supervisor's psychoanalytic inquiry. It is clear, both from the protocol and from private interviews, that the Resident discerns in the Supervisor's performance a knowing-in-practice that he values, but he is frustrated in his attempts to grasp it. What eludes him is the system of understandings which lies behind the Supervisor's inquiry. When the Supervisor demonstrates what he takes as a story sufficient for interpretation, when he focuses on certain details while leaving others in the background, he appears to be guided by a repertoire of story types, interpretive explanations, and psychodynamic patterns. He uses these but does not describe them. He does not try to tell the Resident what leads him to select certain details for attention or to accept a story as adequate for interpretation. Similarly, he does not say why he brushes aside the Resident's proferred interpretations, why he says repeatedly, "we don't know enough, we'd have to wait and see . . . "He does not reveal the thoughts and feelings which guide him in his shifts from one phase of inquiry to the next. He reflects-in-action but he does not reflect on his reflectionin-action. The Resident does not know whether the Supervisor would be unwilling, or perhaps unable, to make more of his knowingin-practice explicit. The Resident has not asked for this, and the Supervisor has not offered it. As the Resident says, rather wistfully, I am not explicit about what I want from the Supervisor and he is not explicit about what he gives, and so it just happens. Nor has the Supervisor tried to discover what the Resident makes of his demonstration. His approach to instruction consists in demonstrating and advocating a kind of therapeutic reflection-in-action, but it is also an approach of mystery and mastery.12 He demonstrates his mastery of the material, but he keeps the sources of his performance mysterious. The Resident has a complementary approach to learning. It is one of mystery and passivity. He witholds his feelings of dissatisfaction and frustration, and he follows the Supervisor's lead, seeking to join in interpretive moves whose sources remain mysterious to him. He does not question the hidden sources of the Supervisor's performance, and he does not ask for what he wants to learn. It is very striking that the two therapists do not make their own interaction into an object of mutual reflection. In one of his interviews, the Resident discovers this point. Excitedly, he shows how his relationship with the Supervisor resembles the patient's relationship to her therapist, especially in the matter of control and cooperation. Like his patient, the Resident feels stuck in his relationship to the person who is supposed to help him, wanting more from him than he feels he is getting, yet angry at himself for wanting more. But these issues do not come up for discussion in the clinical supervision itself. Had they done so, the boundaries of reflection might have been stretched to include the meaning of the Supervisor's demonstration, the Supervisor might have begun to reflect on his own reflection-in-action, and the Resident might have begun to gain access to the mysterious sources of the Supervisor's performance. 