# Town Planning: Limits to Reflection-in-Action The Evolving Context of Planning Practice Town planning has a charter membership in Glazer's society of minor professions. The institutional context of planning practice is notoriously unstable and there are many contending views of the profession, each of which carries a different image of the planning role and a different picture of the body of useful knowledge. At the present time, for example, planners function variously as designers, plan makers, critics, advocates of special interests, regulators, managers, evaluators, and intermediaries. In planning as in other professions, each role tends to be associated with characteristic values, strategies, techniques, and bodies of relevant information. But in the planning profession, images of role have evolved significantly in relatively brief periods of time. The profession, which came into being around the turn of the century, moved in succeeding decades through different ideas in good currency about planning theory and practice, partly in response to changes in context shaped by planners themselves. The history of the evolution of planning roles can be understood as a global conversation between the planning profession and its situation. With the development of the city planning movement in the early years of this century, planners first gained visibility, power, and professional status. The growth of comprehensive and master planning and the widespread establishment of local planning commissions in the United States paralleled the formation of the coalition supportive of town planning in Britain.1 Following World War II, probably as a result of military and economic planning in wartime America, the idea of central planning extended its scope from comprehensive and master planning for towns to such fields as urban renewal, urban and regional transportation, health services, public education, mental health, and criminal justice. In these domains, among many others, the centralist planner operated from the base of institutions created and legitimized through legislation brought into being by ¿ coalition of political forces. The planner framed his role at the center of a system for which he planned, in relation to agencies which would implement his plans and clienteles who would benefit from them. His system of knowledge-in-practice dealt with the framing of objectives and goals, the imagining of a desirable future, the description of baseline conditions, the identification of alternative strategies of action, the description of constraints to be circumvented or removed, the mapping of the system to be influenced, and the prediction of the consequences of action. Later, planners also came to be concerned with the feasibility of implementing plans and the political problems of "selling" them. Through the mid-196os, centralist planning proceeded in this mode. Its operations were based on two main assumptions: 1. There is a working consensus about the content of the public interest, sufficient for the setting of planning goals and objectives, and 2. There is a system of knowledge adequate for the conduct of central planning. It does not matter that these assumptions may never have been true. They were widely believed to be true, and they set the terms of reference for the planning profession. But by the mid-196os, both assumptions were in trouble. The public at large, and planners themselves, were becoming increasingly aware of the counterintuitive consequences, the harmful side effects and the unwanted by-products of implemented plans. Plans designed to solve problems either failed to solve them or created problems worse than the problems they had been designed to solve. Some of the phenomena planners were most anxious to influence—poverty, crime, urban congestion and decay—seemed tenaciously resistant to intervention. The niost broadly believed predictions (those relating to school enrollment, for example) turned out to be mistaken. Attempts to build formal, quantitative models of social phenomena foundered in complexity. Attempts to conduct social experiments were confounded by unanticipated and uncontrollable changes in the experimental context. Planners were found sometimes deliberately, sometimes unintentionally, to be serving interests incongruent with their espoused values. Social critics and angry political pressure groups demonstrated that plans had meanings and consequences well beyond those envisaged by urban planners. And as the perceived scope and complexity of planning increased, planners found that their techniques and models were inadequate to the tasks of analysis, diagnosis, and prediction. Planning "problems"came to seem more like dilemmas made up of conflicts of values, interests, and ideologies unresolvable by recourse to the facts. By the mid-196os, the apparent consensus about the content of the public interest—perhaps even about the feasibility of establishing such a consensus—had faded away. As the harmful consequences of centralist planning and governmental action were discovered, special interest groups formed around issues of injustice, hazard, and neglect. By the late 197os, it was clear that there was no national consensus about the public interest. There was rather a field of special interests: minority groups, women's groups, environmentalists, consumers' groups, advocates of health and safety at work, the handicapped, the protagonists of special education and basic education, neighborhood conservationists, advocates for neighborhood schools, energy conservationists, advocates of zero population growth, advocates for and antagonists of abortion, moral and religious fundamentalists, advocates for guns or gun control, advocates for crime prevention, and advocates for de-institutionalization of prisons and mental hospitals. These constituencies had learned to organize themselves, enter into public debate, and take political action in order to bring their concerns to legislative and judicial reality. In some cases, special interest groups took positions which were in direct and explicit conflict with one another. In other cases, conflicts of interest became clear only as the success of one movement led to consequences contrary to the interests of another. In still other cases, conflict became evident as the different movements found themselves competing in hard times for scarce resources. Throughout the 196os, a new breed of social planners began to criticize established institutions because they rode roughshod over the less powerful. Herbert Gans, Jane Jacobs, Francis Piven, and Mark Fried, among other students of urban renewal, showed how planners acting ostensibly in the public interest actually served the interests of real estate developers and large corporations by displacing the poor and ethnic minorities.2 The social critics and advocate planners operated in a social field made up of the constituents they sought to protect, the established institutions they fought, the media they tried to influence, the courts through which they often sought redress of grievances, and the legislatures through which they tried to shape laws that would regulate the behavior of established interests. Their knowledge-in-practice had to do with issues such as these: expressing the interests of the dispossessed, or empowering the dispossessed to express their own interests; demystifying the professional personas of the centralist planners, showing up their intended or unintended alliance with established interests; explaining how the actions of government and business affect the less powerful; formulating policies and programs to protect the less powerful and identifying the practices of established interest groups which needed most to be watched and controlled; figuring out how to gain visibility and political voice for the dispossessed; building connections to legislators, regulators, and executive agencies. As these critics, advocates, and organizers were able to bring their ideas into good currency, they succeeded in influencing the legislative process either to regulate the actions of established institutions or to establish programs of service or income support for special interest groups. As a partial consequence of their success, the present social context of planning has become a field of institutions organized around contending interests. Regulatory systems have been established by law to monitor and control the actions of agencies such as businesses, schools, hospitals, universities, and real estate developers. The courts play a large and increasing role as adjudicators of doubtful cases, interpreters of the law, dispensers of sanctions for violation of the law, and sometimes as direct monitors or managers of systems in default. Within these institutional fields, planners no longer follow the centralist planning model. They practice in relation to a growing variety of special interest groups and regulatory systems, and they have developed a variety of new or modified roles. They may function as spokesmen, strategists, or technical staff for parties to the regulatory process. They may perform watchdog functions, reviewing, for example, the environmental impact statements of developers or the affirmative action plans of government agencies. They may position themselves in the neutral space between regulators and regulated, functioning as mediators who convene interested parties, helping them to understand one another's position, to identify common interests, or to fashion an acceptable compromise. In these intermediary roles, more like the traditional roles of the lawyer than the sometime centralist planner, knowledge must be developed and brought to bear on issues such as these: understanding the field of actors and interests with its potentials for satisfaction, frustration, mutual constraint or mutual enhancement; formulating issue-specific targets for negotiation, mediation, or inquiry; creating conditions for effective control or evasion of control, for successful negotiation, or for productive inquiry; designing intermediary interventions and assessing their effectiveness; maintaining the conditions of credibility and legitimacy on which the intermediary roles depend. In the case that follows, I shall consider an example of this most recent form of planning practice, showing how one intermediary planner has evolved knowing-in-practice which enables him to address issues such as those listed above. In this case study, however, I shall explore several more general features of professional knowledge.3 A professional role places skeletal demands on a practitioner's behavior, but within these constraints, each individual develops his own way of framing his role. Whether he chooses his role frame from the profession's repertoire, or fashions it for himself, his professional knowledge takes on the character of a system. The problems he sets, the strategies he employs, the facts he treats as relevant, and his interpersonal theories of action are bound up with his way of framing his role. In the case that follows, I shall describe such a system of knowing-inpractice. Further, a system of this sort tends to be self-reinforcing. Depending on the kind of role frame he has constructed and on the kind of interpersonal theory of action he has evolved, a practitioner's reflection-in-action may be more or less limited in scope and depth. In the case that follows, I shall try to show how limits to reflection-in-action are set and maintained. ## Some of What One Planner Knows The individual whose practice we will be examining in this chapter is a town planner concerned primarily with the physi cal development of the town he serves. Yet he makes no comprehensive plans and prepares no designs for neighborhoods or regions. He has defined his job as one of reviewing proposals submitted by private developers to local regulatory bodies, and has positioned himself as an intermediary between these two parties. He seeks, by advising and negotiating with developers, to influence the direction and quality of physical development in the town. Substituting these functions for the more traditional preparation of plans, he plans by proxy. Given his way of framing his role in the town and his image of the dilemmas associated with that role, the planner has learned to treat his practice as a balancing act in which he tries continually to advise and negotiate with developers while at the same time preserving his credibility with all the parties on whom his role depends. In the following protocol, a transcript of a videotape of one of the meetings recorded in the planner's office, a developer presents drawings and plans for remodelling an apartment building which he and his uncle own in the town. Under the town's development bylaws, the planner must review such plans before submitting them to the Zoning Board of Appeals which has authority to grant or withhold variances. As the tape begins, the planner rolls up his sleeves, consults his notes, and leans across the table to look at the developer and his architect. PLANNER: I'll give you a review here. I think we ought to base some of the discussion we had a couple of weeks ago. You've got plans, and what I suggested is that we go over the zoning bylaw to see exactly how they conform. The building plans, the structure itself, is no problem, but I think that within the zoning bylaws we've got to have some areas that we have to look at very closely in the site plan. Okay? Now, uh, and as far as the building is concerned, I think we can work out the details with the building inspector about the code requirements. ARCHITECT: Right PLANNER:. . . which you work with all the time anyway . . . The planner has defined the meeting's purpose, which is to review the developer's plans to see “exactly how they conform" to the zoning bylaw. He divides the plan into two parts, one that he finds acceptable (“the structure itself") and one that he finds problematic (“the site plan"). From here on, he will review elements of the site plan which he has listed for comment. First, however, he checks to see whether the developer is familiar with the bylaws. PLANNER: . . . but, Tom, have you had a chance to look at the development bylaws? (Developer looks at architect.) ARCHITECT: Well, I've gone through it roughly. PLANNER: Why don't we look at the lot? DEVELoPER: We've blown the plans up quite a bit for you . . . ARCHITECT: They were real small, you couldn't see 'em. Now the planner zones in on the first item on his list, the question of lot size. P: All right, now. Under the new apartment controls in our town, before the new bylaw enactor, you had to have 2o,o0o square feet of lot area; you had only 14,341. As you know, it's apparently impossible to get any more. D: Uh-hum. P: Now, what you wanna do is add a couple apartment units to this building. That is gonna require a variance . . . because . . . you are . . . adding to a multi-family building in an apartment zone where the lots aren't large enough. So you're gonna need a variance on lot size. . . . At the same time, you'll need a special permit because you are dealing with an apartment structure, but that can be handled. As I !ook at it, without seeing a more detailed site plan (but that can be put together eventually), the only variance you need is on lot area. Everything else is all right. ## Town Planning: Limits to Reflection-in-Action The developer, still preoccupied with the visibility of his plans (as though that might remove the difficulty), questions whether he is really in violation of the bylaw. D: I don't know. I think I have something a little bit larger for us to look at. I don't know that we violate too much of the thing, especially if we get involved in taking down that little thing up front there. The planner explains how the developer may be able to justify a variance on lot size, ignoring the latter's hint that there may be no need for it. P: Obviously you have no problems with the floor area. D: We don't. P: You have no problem with land area per dwelling unit, and when you go to the Zoning Board of Appeals, obviously that's gonna be one thing you want to play out. Even though you don't have the 2o,o0o square feet of land, you're not even approaching the zoning limit, because you're dealing with existing buildings. Without pausing to sound out the developer's reaction to these suggestions, the planner goes on to point out additional requirements in the bylaw. P: The new zoning bylaw does have two open-space requirements, and they're slightly different from other bylaws you may have worked with. You must have a landscaped area, which is ten percent of the gross floor area of the buildings on the lot, not ten percent of the lot area, unless you have a usable open-space area of 25 percent of the building. Now look closely at the definitions of the bylaw: What constitutes landscape? What constitutes usable? D: Uh-hum. p: Essentially, the section of your landscaped area can be met perhaps here, or along part of the site. The developer checks out wha't is included under the term "usable open space." D: When they say usable, are they referring to space that's been paved for parking? A: No. D: No, so that's over and above that. P: So its unpaved. A: Unpaved. D: Unpaved. P: Unpaved. With this chorus of "unpaved"s confirming the existence of the problem, the architect moves to suggest how the problem could be solved: A: You take that door down, that's how you could solve that very easily. But the developer does not show much interest in this idea. His attention has shifted to a new consideration which leads him to depart from the planner's carefully prepared list of possible violations of the bylaw: D: You know, when I went back after our last meeting I discussed with my uncle, who is the other owner of the building. He said something and he made a lot of sense. Well, look he said, if we've got to take down the store, he said, and if we violate (and it appears to me that the biggest thing is the 20,ooo flipper rule that we don't violate too badly from what I can see—but you're the planner, you know better than I). If we're violating only that anyway, he says, why don't we ask for a couple more apartments? Why are we settling for eleven? Because then we'd be able to do other things, even with maybe keeping the same structure. And I have no answer for that. If there is only one variance needed on lot size, what about the possibility of increasing the number of apartments on the lot? To which the planner responds: p: Now, I'm not going to say yes or no. D: All right. P: Because I think there's only so much you can put on this land. D: Right. A: Legally. P: That's the criterion. Now, I don't know if it's nine, ten, eleven, twenty, or fifty. But I do know that as long as you're dealing with existing buildings, you know, 14,o0o square feet of land is not, I think, going to be a serious problem. But I'm not the Zoning Board of Appeals. That's their decision. If you then begin to overbuild on the land, you have to have variances for open space. D: We don't want that. p: Right. Now all you have to worry about is one variance. Having disposed of the developer's question, the planner proceeds to the next item on his list: P: The other thing I think you want to look at very carefully is the article on parking. The parking requirements are slightly different than they used to be. In an apartment house, you have to have one parking space for each efficiency, one and a half for each two-bedroom, two for each three- or four-bedroom. I'm not sure exactly how much parking you have provided here now. D: Right, I think we have seventeen there. But the parking requirement is complicated by two further provisions of the bylaw: P: Also in the parking section, I want you to look at Section 812, there are setback requirements for parking areas. We want to keep them off the lot line. Now that's gonna limit your area a little bit. A: You mean side and rear. p: Once again, I'm just urging you to lay it out. Now, this is just a simple layout here. There are other ways, I'm sure, to do it. A: Oh, every one that you eliminate, the better off you are, there's no question about it. Now, if it comes down to the 20,o0o square feet variance, and even the parking variance, that's still not too bad. P: Okay, but it's gonna take some layouts to determine what you can and can't do. These parking spaces were thrown in without looking at the new ratios. Because we looked at them very carefully, and I think we found that you have four extra spaces. D: Yes. ## The planner now turns to his concluding piece of advice: P: When you go down the road and actually apply for the variance and go to the public hearing, make sure you're prepared to answer these questions. Now, uh, I don't want to prejudge, but the one question they're going to ask is, what hardship do you have with this particular piece of property? Why do you need the variance to do what you want to do? D: Well, based on what I told you, is that a sufficient hardship? P: As I say, I don't prejudge. D: No. P: There are certainly economic considerations. Generally, you know, you've got a situation where you've owned a piece of property for a long time. In order to do something in these times when costs are different, you need to increase the income potential of the building. . . D: Exactly. P: But they're gonna want to know specifics, and I think that's the kind of thinking you ought to work on. O.K.? ## And here the architect raises a new possibility: A: With regard to the fact that he has to go for a variance anyway, what's the possibility of going for a new building? P: I think then you're gonna run into difficulties, because you're asking for a new variance. Now, if you're asking for a new building to replace the eight units that you have there, then I seriously doubt that a variance will be granted. The town has made it very clear that in order to build new apartments you've got to have 2o,ooo square feet of land. And I know of no case where they've granted a variance for a new building on a lot under 20,o00 square feet. In the remaining few minutes of the meeting, the developer agrees that he had "pretty much ruled out going that route." What happens in the protocol. Most of the planner's behavior in this meeting can be understood as an attempt to follow rigorously an agenda which he establishes at the outset: to review the developer's plans in order to see exactly how they conform to the zoning bylaw. Hence the planner takes up, in turn, the factors of lot size, open space, and parking. The developer and his architect respond by questioning the meanings of such terms as “open space," or by suggesting how the various problems might be solved. On two separate occasions, however, the developer or his architect makes a proposal and the planner responds to it in a way that suggests a kind of bargaining. Early in the meeting, the developer quotes his uncle's suggestion that as long as they need a variance because of the “2o,ooo feet flipper rule," why shouldn't they go for a couple more apartments? The planner responds with "Now, I'm not going to say yes or no . . . ," but he goes on to spell out the factors that will govern the board's response, all the while setting limits to his own authority to give such an answer (“I'm not the Zoning Board of Appeals"). At the very end of the protocol the architect raises the question of going for a new building, and here the planner answers firmly, "I know of no case where they've granted a variance for a new building on a lot under 2o,000 square feet." Elsewhere the planner prepares the developer for a future meeting with the Zoning Board of Appeals, rather as though he were preparing a student for an exam. He signals questions to be asked, answers that will be acceptable, and homework to be done. (“. . . they're going to ask what hardship do you have . . .? Why do you need the variance to do what you want to do? . . . think about that.") At the same time, he tries to avoid giving the impression that he can make such decisions himself. ("As I say, I don't prejudge.") Thus the planner undertakes three main tasks. As he reviews the plans and notes possible violations of the zoning bylaw, he advises the developer about the need for variances. He prepares him for the examination he can expect when he puts his case before the Zoning Board of Appeals. And he bargains with the developer, responding guardedly to proposals the developer uses, apparently to discover how much he will be allowed to get away with. The planner's conduct of his meeting with the developer can be understood in terms of his attempt to solve problems he has framed around these three main tasks. In his review of the plans, he is meticulous. He takes pains to document his evaluations ("Don't forget these items . . When you work on the site plan, I'll give you a copy of this if you want"). At the same time, he continually exhibits a concern with the limits of his own authority, announcing frequently that he can only anticipate the board's actions and can make no decisions by himself. He behaves, in other words, as though he must conduct a rigorous preliminary review of plans which is in constant danger of being misconstrued as final. Occasionally he calls attention to a possible violation of the bylaw, communicating information he appears to think the developer may regard as negative. At each such point, he behaves as though he wishes to avoid discouraging the developer: As I look at it, without seeing a more detailed site plan (but that can be put together eventually), the only variance you need is on lot area. Here he stresses that only one variance will be necessary, pointing out that he has not yet seen the final site plan, but plays down the difficulty of preparing such a plan. When he points out a potential problem, he makes the remedy seem easy: Now, this is just a simple layout here. There are other ways, I'm sure, to do it. And he tries to make the negative information palatable by sur rounding it with "good news": The building plans, the structure itself, is no problem, but I think that, within the zoning bylaws, we've got to . . . look at very closely in the site plan. Okay? Now, uh, and as far as the building is concerned, I think we can work out the details with the building inspector about the code requirements . . . something you work with all the time anyway." The planner deals with negative information by minimizing it, making the remedy seem easy, and surrounding it with good news. As he preps the developer, he suggests the form of an acceptable answer but makes clear that someone else will finally grade the exam: Now, uh, I don't want to prejudge, but the one question they're going to ask is, what hardship do you have with this particular piece of property? He is' careful to say that the developer will have to work out the details by himself: P: In order to do something in these times when costs are different, you need to increase the income potential of the building, and in order to do that, you need to rehabilitate the building. D: Exactly. P: But they're gonna want to know specifics, and I think that's the kind of thinking you ought to work on. Okay? The planner's problem seems to be this: without usurping the board's evaluative role or doing the developer's work for him, he must make sure that the developer will be able to give the right answers. When he responds to proposals for a few more apartments or a new building, he behaves again as though he had to meet conflicting requirements. He tries to prevent the developer from putting forward proposals the board will reject: . . . there's only so much you can put on this land. . . . That's the criterion. But he also tries to avoid discouraging proposals the board may accept: . . . as long as you're dealing with existing buildings, you know, 14,ooo square feet of land is not, I think, going to be a serious problem. Having thus conveyed the impression that he can predict or even influence the Board's behavior, he ends by setting a limit to his own authority. . . . I'm not going to say yes or no. . . . . . . I'm not the Zoning Board of Appeals . . . That's their decision. Thus as he reviews the developer's plans, prepares him for this forthcoming session with the Board of Appeals, and bargains with him, the planner performs a balancing act. He tries to criticize the developer's plans without discouraging him. He tries to be stringent in his review of plans and at the same time permissive. He tries to lead the developer along the right lines without reducing the developer's responsibility for his own proposal. And he behaves authoritatively while presenting himself as devoid of authority. Framing the role and the situation. Just as we can understand the planner's behavior in terms of the problems he has set for himself, so we can see these problems, and the resulting balancing act, as a consequence of the way he has chosen to frame his role. When the planner began to work for the town, he knew that several roles were open to him. Like his predecessor, he could have made himself into a writer of plans, covering the walls of his office with maps and charts. Or he could have become a community organizer and advocate. He chose, instead, the intermediary role. He seeks to bring to reality his image of what is good for the town, but he cannot initiate anything. Like a labor mediator, marriage counselor, co-ordinator, or broker, he must solicit and respond to the initiatives of others. He can only plan by proxy, through his influence on the plans of others. In this intermediate function, he is interdependent with those who initiate and with those who have regulatory authority. Without the planner's advice and help, the developers cannot understand and negotiate the hurdles they must jump in order to gain permission to build in the town. Without their proposals, the planner cannot realize his image of what is good for the town. Without the Zoning Board of Appeals, the planner has no function. Without the planner's screening and tailoring of development projects, the board could not do its regulatory job. These interdependencies are essential conditions for the “review game" which the planner plays with the developers. The developers come to the planner for advice and review of plans, and he uses this to bargain with them. In return for their concessions to his image of what is good for the town, he will help them get what they want from the board. As he remarks in an interview, When a person gets in a variance case or a special zoning case, I immediately see an opportunity for negotiation and an opportunity for us to lend some assistance, and maybe give away a little within bounds, but also extract something for the town. The planner tries to win the review game by wringing concessions from the developer, while at the same time helping him to pass the board's review. The developer tries to win by getting concessions from the planner without paying too great a price for them. The planner can lose the game in two ways: by allowing bad projects to get through, or by discouraging good ones. The developer can also lose in two ways: by failing to get his project through, or by paying too high a price for getting it through. In order to be able to play the review game, the planner must maintain his credibility both with the developers and with the Zoning Board of Appeals. With both groups, he has worked hard to shape the attitudes and expectations which are essential to his intermediary functions. At the beginning, he had to create the institutional arrangements which legitimize his role. As he explained, Under the old zoning bylaws, there was no requirement that we file a report. We took it upon ourselves to file. Under the new zoning bylaws, which we wrote, there are more stringent standards. We will continue our same policy, but by addressing specific items in various cases. These are now in the bylaws. He had also to create, in developers and board members, a network of expectations. Board members had to learn to respect his expertise; developers, to respect his influence with and knowledge about the board. These expectations had to become routine and, once routinized, they had to be continually reinforced. Thus the planner has a dual objective. In order to improve the town he must win the review game, but he must also maintain the credibility on which his role depends. In these two requirements, which turn out to conflict with one another, lie the origins of his balancing act. As the planner reviews the developer's plans, he must search out mismatches between the plan and the pertinent rules. For each mismatch, he must estimate the likelihood that the board will grant or withold an exception to the rule. He must invest ways of circumventing their negative responses, and he must predict their reactions to such efforts at circumvention. His knowledge-in-practice must be adequate to all of these activities. But in addition, he must avoid being perceived as a usurper of the board's regulatory function. For if he is so perceived, both members of the board and developers will cease to regard him as an intermediary. On the other hand, if he is perceived as lacking in knowledge or influence, he will be unable to bargain successfully. Similarly, he must be tough enough to screen out unacceptable projects, or he will lose his credibility with the board. Yet he must not exclude acceptable projects, or he will shut off the flow of proposals. As he preps the developer, the planner must anticipate the board's questions, distinguish the less from the more important of these, and determine the direction of acceptable answers. He must also gauge the developer's understanding of the problems, distinguish what he can and cannot do for himself, and motivate him to do the necessary homework. At the same time, he must avoid becoming identified with the developer's proposals or he will cease to be regarded as an intermediary. The planner's bargaining with the developer follows a familiar schema. There are two parties, each of whom has a stake in the outcomes of interaction. Each must communicate his own wants, learn what the other wants, formulate proposals, and learn the other's responses to them. Each gives something in order to get something, trying to get as much as he can while giving as little as possible, and the process continues until each party gets what he is willing to settle for, or until one party decides to stop. In order to bargain effectively, the planner must know a great deal about costs and benefits of interest to the developer, and he must know a great deal about the board's likely responses to proposed concessions and about the effects of such concessions on the quality of building in the town. But the planner must conduct his bargaining without appearing to usurp the board's role. The problems the planner sets for himself are the problems of balancing these several constraints. In order to review effectively while preserving his credibility as an intermediary, he strives for thoroughness and clarity but also insists on presenting his review as preliminary. In order to insure that acceptable projects will be approved while at the same time protecting his intermediate status, he tries to make sure that the developer understands how to answer the board's questions while at the same time distancing himself from the developer's proposal. In order to bargain effectively without discouraging the flow of proposals, he tries to convey negative information and also to make it palatable, and he tries to convey his ability to make or withold concessions while at the same time remaining within the bounds of his legitimate authority. In the bargaining process, especially, the planner's balancing act leads to strange effects. Clearly, planner and developer bargain with one another. Privately, the planner states explicitly that they do so. Yet in their public meeting, they give the impression of attempting to conceal what they are doing. When the developer makes a bid for concessions, he does so indirectly, by referring to a conversation with his uncle. And when the planner responds, he says, [I don't think it's] going to be a serious problem. But I'm not the Zoning Board of Appeals. The developer bids indirectly, by appearing to transmit his uncle's request for a clarification of the rules, and the planner responds indirectly, by guardedly predicting the board's reaction. Why this indirectness, as though the success of the game depended on appearing not to play it? In the planner's case, the explanation lies in the conflicting requirements that flow from his dual objective. He must negotiate with developers and in order to do so, he must claim, at least implicitly, to be able to make or influence the board's decisions on requests for variances. But this claim makes him vulnerable to the danger that developers will put him in place of the board. The board might resent this usurpation of their authority, and developers might take it as a cue for increased pressure or even, perhaps, for bribery. Hence the planner's frequent "I'm not the Zoning Board of Appeals!", uttered just when he has made an implicit claim to authority. In the developer's case, he acts as though he were colluding with the planner by appearing to share the assumption that the latter has no authority. If the planner is to appear to have no authority, the developer must appear to make no bids for concessions. But this collusion, which makes the review game into an "open secret," adds a new layer of ambiguity to a process that is already ambiguous. In the review game, each possible violation of the bylaw is also a possible bargaining point. When the planner brings up such an item, he may or may not be communicating an invitation to negotiation. If, in addition to this, the planner and the developer cannot admit to the game they are playing, then ambiguous invitations and ambiguous responses can never be publicly clarified. The self-reinforcing system of knowing-in-practice. The planner's balancing act flows from the particular way in which he has framed his intermediary role. It is true that his twofold objective is inherently conflictual, requiring that he negotiate with developers without infringing on the board's authority, but this is not by itself sufficient to create the conditions for the balancing act. These follow from the theory of action he uses to set and solve the problems of his interactions with developers and members of the board. The planner's interpersonal theory of action conforms to a model that Chris Argyris and I have called Model I.4 An individual who conforms to Model I behaves according to characteristic values and strategies of action. His values include the following: . Achieve the task, as I define it . In win/lose interactions with others, try to win and avoid losing. • Avoid negative feelings, such as anger or resentment. . Be rational, in the sense of "Keep cool, be persuasive, use rational argument." Among the strategies by which he tries to satisfy these values, there are the following: . Control the task unilaterally. . Protect yourself unilaterally, without testing to see whether you need to do so. • Protect the other unilaterally, without testing to see whether he wishes to be protected. When the several parties to an interaction behave according to Model I, there are predictable consequences. The behavioral world—the world of experienced interpersonal interaction tends to be win/lose. The participants in it act defensively and are perceived as doing so. Attributions to others tend to be tested privately, not publicly, for public testing carries a perceived risk of vulnerability. Hence, attributions tend to become self-sealing; the individual cannot get the data that would disconfirm them. And individuals tend to employ strategies of mystery and mastery, seeking to master the situation while keeping their own thoughts and feelings mysterious. The planner in our protocol frames the problems of his meeting with the developer in a Model I way and brings a Model I theory of action to their solution. He perceives the review game, which he plays with the developer, as a win/lose game. He sets and tries to solve problems by a strategy of mystery and mastery. He has decided ahead of time, for example, what the developer needs to know. In order to make sure that the developer gets the right message, he sets up the meeting in his own office and asks the architect to be present, because he believes the architect will help the developer to pay closer attention to what is going on. He introduces his agenda at the beginning of the meeting and follows it rigorously throughout. He stamps in the messages he regards as important, and uses his expertise (as in the matter of parking spaces) to reinforce his strategy of control. In order to keep the developer from reacting defensively to negative information, he uses a variety of techniques to soften or mask the impact of his criticisms of the plans. He preps the developer for his presentation to the Zoning Board of Appeals while indicating to the developer that he must treat the proposal as his own. And he negotiates with the developer, exhibiting the authority he denies, and induces the developer to collude with him in appearing not to be negotiating. The intermediary role, by itself, requires none of these strategies of action. But the planner's framing of the intermediary role does require them. The balancing act follows from the fact that the planner keeps the conflicting demands of the intermediary role to himself and attempts to manage them by unilaterally controlling the impressions he creates in the minds of others. Thus his framing of the role, his setting of the problems of the meeting, and his Model I theory of action, make up a self-reinforcing system. One could say either that he has framed role and problems to suit his theory of action, or that he has evolved a theory of action suited to the role and problems he has framed. ## Limits to Reflection-in-Action The planner is an individual who likes to reflect on his practice. Indeed, his willingness to participate in our research grew out of this interest. But he limits his reflection to his strategies of unilaterial control. He mentioned in an interview, for example, that he spends time experimenting with such rhetorical devices as delivery, intonation, and eye contact. He reflects on the strategies by which he tries to create the desired impressions in others, but he does not reflect on the role frame, problem setting, or theory of action which lead him to try to create one impression rather than another. Indeed, his balancing act and his strategy of mystery and mastery are bound together in a system of knowing-in-practice which tends, in several ways, to make itself immune to reflection. Since the planner is doing one thing while appearing to do another, he cannot easily make his assumptions public or subject them to public testing. His sense of vulnerability discourages reflection. And he is so busy managing the balancing act, manipulating the impressions he makes on others and defending against vulnerability to exposure, that he has little opportunity to reflect on the problem settings that drive his performance. Moreover, for the same reason, he is unlikely to detect errors of interpretation which might provoke broader and deeper reflection. Our protocol contains, as it turns out, an example of just such an error. In an interview following his meeting with the planner, the developer revealed that he had decided against going forward with his project because he would have to apply for a single variance. He had other opportunities for investment, he explained, and he did not want to spend his energies on what he thought would be a long and cumbersome process of appeal. He had made this decision during his meeting with the planner, but he had chosen not to reveal it. When he learned of the developer's decision, the planner was shocked. He had based his strategy on minimizing variances, but he had assumed that a single, easily obtainable variance on lot size would not stand in the project's way. Nevertheless, to the developer, the need for a single variance had loomed large. And he had responded with a strategy of mystery and mastery similar to the planner's. He had run a private test of project feasibility, and when it produced negative results, he had decided unilaterally to abandon the project. The planner's and developer's theories of action had combined to produce a behavioral world in which each withheld negative information, tested assumptions privately, and sought to maintain unilateral control over the other. In this sort of climate, the developer was unlikely to reveal his negative decision. To do so would have violated the "open secret" of the review game into which the planner had drawn him, and it would also have called for a degree of trust unlikely within a Model I behavioral world. For similar reasons, the planner was unlikely to make a public test of his assumptions about the developer's decisions. As a result, the planner was unaware that his efforts had been futile from the moment the developer learned of the need for a single variance. The planner had no access to information that might have put this pivotal assumption in doubt. It is of interest, nevertheless, to ask what might have happened if, contrary to fact, the planner had become aware of his mistake. In what directions might his inquiry then have taken him? This is a peculiar sort of question because, in order to have become aware of this information, the planner would have had to behave according to a very different theory of action, one conducive to the public testing of private assumptions. Argyris and I have proposed a model of such a theory of action, which we call Model II. The question stated above then becomes the following: What might have happened if the planner had operated on a Model II theóry of action? An individual who conforms to Model II tries to satisfy the following values: . Give and get valid information. • Seek out and provide others with directly observable data and correct reports, so that valid attributions can be made. . Create the conditions for free and informed choice. Try to create, for oneself and for others, awareness of the values at stake in decision, awareness of the limits of one's capacities, and awareness of the zones of experience free of defense mechanisms beyond one's control. . Increase the likelihood of internal commitment to decisions made. Try to create conditions, for oneself and for others, in which the individual is committed to an action because it is intrinsically satisfying—not, as in the case of Model I, because it is accompanied by external rewards or punishments. These three values are interconnected in several ways. Valid information is essential to informed choice. Freedom of choice depends on one's ability to select objectives that challenge one's capacities within a tolerable range, which again depends on valid information. An individual is more likely to feel internally committed to a freely made decision. Among the strategies for achieving these values, there are the following: Make designing and managing the environment a bilateral task, so that the several parties to the situation can work toward freedom of choice and internal commitment. Make protection of self or other a joint operation, so that one does not withold negative information from the other without testing the attribution that underlies the decision to withhold. . Speak in directly observable categories, providing the data from which one's inferences are drawn and thereby opening them to disconfirmation. • Surface private dilemmas, so as to encourage the public testing of the assumptions on which such dilemmas depend. When the several parties to an interaction behave according to Model II, they tend to be seen by others as minimally defensive and open to learning. They tend to be seen as firmly committed to their positions but equally committed to having them confronted and tested. Discussions tend then to be open to the reciprocal exploration of risky ideas. Assumptions are more likely to be subjected to public test and are less likely to become self-sealing. Learning cycles—not only with respect to the means for achieving one's goals but with respect to the desirability of the goals—tend to be set in motion. If the planner had been operating on a Model II theory of action, he would not have devoted his energies to maintaining unilateral control of his own agenda, but would also have tried to elicit the developer's agenda. He would have tested for the developer's responses to the information that a variance would be required, and he would therefore increase the likelihood of discovering that for the developer the need for a single variance was enough to make the project unattractive. Had he become aware of this negative information, the planner might have gone on to reflect on his approach to the conflicting demands of his intermediate role. He might ask, for example, why he finds himself in the position of having to bargain with the developer without appearing to do so—a condition that exacerbates the problem of getting access to crucial information about the developer's intentions. This condition grows out of the planner's balancing act which depends, in turn, on his attempt to manage the conflicting demands of his role by a strategy of mystery and mastery—that is, by keeping his conflicting objectives private while controlling the impressions he creates in the minds of developers and members of the board. If he were operating on a Model Il theory of action, the planner might ask himself, "What if I were to make my dilemma public?" This would have implications for his conduct both with board members and with developers. It would carry risks, but it would offer the possibility of important benefits In a more open discussion of his role in the town, the planner might describe to the board his strategy of using “review of plans" to seek out opportunities for negotiation with developers. He might point out that he cannot negotiate effectively unless he can exercise some authority of his own, without fearing that the board will later reverse his decisions. At the same time, he might indicate his recognition of the fact that final decisions do remain with the board. He might invite the board to monitor his negotiations, working with him to keep the lines of authority clear and at the same time flexible. By surfacing these issues, it is true, he might irritate some members of the board; but he might also confirm publicly what many of them had already privately suspected. With developers, the planner might admit that, while his actions are subject to the board's final approval, he does have some discretionary freedom to decide on requests for variances. In doing this, he might open himself to more vigorous attempts on the part of developers to subject him to pressure or persuasion. It is hard to see how this would be a very great risk, however. Since the developers already bargain with him, they must believe that he has some freedom to carry out his end of the bargain. Under these conditions, the planner would have reframed his balancing act. The central conflict of his intermediary role would remain but it would be a public conflict. There would be no need to bargain while appearing not to do so. The planner would be less likely to make undetected errors. At the same time, he would experience new demands for Model II behavior. He would no longer measure his effectiveness in terms of the successful performance of his balancing act but in terms of his ability to bargain openly, to share control of the interaction, to advocate his own goals firmly while inquiring effectively into the goals of others. He would also reduce some of the impediments to his further reflection-in-action. ## Conclusion The case of the town planner illustrates, in one small episode drawn from the practice of one planner, how and with what sorts of consequences planning roles are framed. I have tried to show how planning roles have evolved in a global conversation with the planning situation which has led, at various times over the past decades, to the salience of centralist planning, advocacy, regulatory, and intermediary roles. But I have also tried to show, in the case of a practitioner of intermediary planning, how knowing-in-practice consists of a self-reinforcing system in which role frame, strategies of action, relevant facts, and interpersonal theories of action are bound up together. The intermediary role, in which a practitioner places himself between those who propose and those who dispose, carries inherent potentials for conflict. Nevertheless, the meaning of this conflict for practice varies greatly with the way in which each practitioner frames his role. Role frame is interdependent with interpersonal theory of action, and the resulting system of knowing-in-practice has consequences both for the practitioner's ability to detect crucial errors and for the scope and direction of his reflection-in-action. In our example, the planner's balancing act is tied to his Model I theory-in-use. In the alternative that I have outlined, a Model II theory-in-use would be linked to a framing of the intermediary role in which private dilemmas would be made public and private assumptions would be subjected to public test. In the first case, attributions tend to become self-sealing, and reflection-in-action tends to be limited to consideration of the effectiveness of strategies of unilaterial control. In the second case, errors of attribution are more likely to surface and reflection-in-action is more likely to extend in scope to the entire system of knowing-in-practice, including the framing of the role itself. So long as a practitioner chooses to play an intermediary role, he cannot avoid the conflicts inherent in the role. But within these constraints, he has considerable freedom to choose the role frame he will adopt and the theory of action according to which he will behave. Depending on these interdependent choices, he will increase or constrict his capacity for reflectionin-action. 