# The Art of Managing: Reflection-in-Action Within an Organizational Learning System The Split in the Field of Management The field of management has long been marked by a conflict between two competing views of professional knowledge. On the first view, the manager is a technician whose practice consists in applying to the everyday problems of his organization the principles and methods derived from management science. On the second, the manager is a craftsman, a practitioner of 236 an art of managing that cannot be reduced to explicit rules and theories. The first view dates from the early decades of the twentieth century when the idea of professional management first came into good currency. The second has an even longer history, management having been understood as an art, a matter of skill and wisdom, long before it began to be understood as a body of techniques. But the first view has gained steadily in power. The idea of management science, and the complementary idea of the manager as a technician, has been carried by a social movement which has spread out from its center in the United States to encompass the whole of the industrialized world. The origins of this movement are difficult to identify, but a critically important milestone in its development was the work of Frederick Taylor who, in the 192os, conceived of management as a form of human engineering based on a science of work.1 While Taylor may not have invented these ideas, he was certainly the first to embody them in a practice of industrial management and consultation, and he popularized them in a way that has had enormous influence in industry, in business, and in the administration of public agencies. Taylor treated work as a man/machine process which could be decomposed into measurable units of activity. Every industrial process, from the shovelling of coal to the processing of steel, could be subjected to experimental analysis. The design of tools, the bodily movements of the worker, and the sequencing of production steps, could be combined in an optimum configuration, a "one best way."Taylor saw the industrial manager as a designer of work, a controller and monitor of performance, and a distributor of rewards and punishments carefully selected and applied so as to yield optimally efficient production. Above all, he saw the manager as an on-line experimenter, a scientist in action, whose practice would consist in the trial and measurement of designs and methods aimed at the discovery and implementation of the one best way. Taylor's views were by no means unique. Thorsten Veblen, to take one extraordinary example, also perceived that industry had taken on the characteristics of an organizational machine within which managers of the business enterprise must be increasingly concerned with standards, measures of performance, and the articulation of interlocking activities. But it was Taylor who embodied these ideas in practiace, and it was Taylor's version of the practice of industrial engineering, efficiency expertise, and time and motion study which has evolved into the management science of the present day. World War II gave an enormous impetus to the management science movement, first, because of the general rise in prestige of science and technology, and second, because of the birth of operations research and systems theory. These disciplines, which grew out of the use of applied mathematics to solve problems of submarine search and bomb tracking, were later exported to industry, commerce, and government. In the wake of World War II, management science grew to maturity. Teachers and researchers in the new schools of management, in partnership with managers in public and private sectors, have engendered a plethora of new techniques. There is no field of management which has been immune to the incursions of management science. What was once true only of industrial production has now become true of sales, personnel selection and training, budgeting and financial control, marketing, business policy, and strategic planning. Technical panaceas have appeared on the scene with clocklike regularity, old ones making way for new. Value analysis, management by objectives, planning programming and budgeting, and zero-based budgeting are only a few of the better-known examples. Even the human relations movement, which had originated as a reaction against Taylorism, has tended increasingly to present itself as a body of techniques. Yet in spite of the increasingly powerful status of management science and technique, managers have remained persistently aware of important areas of practice which fall outside the bounds of technical rationality. This awareness has taken two forms. Managers have become increasingly sensitive to the phenomena of uncertainty, change, and uniqueness. In the last twenty years, "decision under uncertainty" has become a term of art. It has become commonplace for managers to speak of the “"turbulent" environments in which problems do not lend themselves to the techniques of benefit-cost analysis or to probabilistic reasoning. At least at the level of espoused theory, managers have become used to the instability of patterns of competition, economic context, consumer interests, sources of raw materials, attitudes of the labor force, and regulatory climate. And managers have become acutely aware that they are often confronted with unique situations to which they must respond under conditions of stress and limited time which leave no room for extended calculation or analysis. Here they tend to speak not of technique but of “intuition." Quite apart from these exceptions to the day-to-day routine of management practice, managers have remained aware of a dimension of ordinary professional work, crucially important to effective performance, which cannot be reduced to technique. Indeed, they are sometimes aware that even management technique rests on a foundation of nonrational, intuitive artistry. Among theorists of management, the nonrational dimension of managing has had several notable exponents. In chapter 2, I have cited Chester Barnard's description of “nonlogical processes," Geoffrey Vickers's analysis of the art of judgment, and Michael Polanyi's reflections on tacit knowing. More recently a Canadian professor of management, Henry Mintzberg, has caused a considerable stir with studies of the actual behavior of top managers that reveal a virtual absence of the methods that managers are "supposed to" use.2 And in some of the most prestigious schools of management, where the curriculum depends on cases drawn from the actual experience of business firms, there is a widely held belief that managers learn to be effective not primarily through the study of theory and technique but through long and varied practice in the analysis of business problems, which builds up a generic, essentially unanalyzable capacity for problem solving. It is no exaggeration, then, to say that the field of management is split into two camps, each of which holds a different view of the nature of professional knowledge. At the same time that management science and technique have grown increasingly in power and prestige, there has been a persistent and growing awareness of the importance of an art of managing which reveals itself both in crucially important situations of uncertainty, instability, and uniqueness, and in those dimensions of everyday practice which depend upon the spontaneous exercise of intuitive artistry. One sign of this split is that in some schools of management, representatives of the two tendencies—the professors of management science and the practitioners of case-method—no longer speak to one another. The representatives of each school of thought go about their business as though the other school of thought did not exist. But a split of this kind, which is barely tolerable in a professional school, creates for thoughtful students and practitioners a particularly painful variant of the dilemma of “rigor or relevance."For if rigorous management means the application of management science and technique, then a "rigorous manager" must be selectively inattentive to the art which he brings to much of his day-to-day practice, and he must avoid situations—often the most important in organizational life—where he would find himself confronted with uncertainty, instability, or uniqueness. But if the art of managing can be described, at least in part, and can be shown to be rigorous in a way peculiar to itself, then the dilemma of rigor or relevance need not be so painful. Indeed, it may be possible to bring the art of managing into dialogue with management science. ## The Art of Managing In management as in other fields, "art" has a two-fold meaning. It may mean intuitive judgment and skill, the feeling for phenomena and for action that I have called knowing-inpractice. But it may also designate a manager's reflection, in a context of action, on phenomena which he perceives as incongruent with his intuitive understandings. Managers do reflect-in-action. Sometimes, when reflection is triggered by uncertainty, the manager says, in effect, "This is puzzling; how can I understand it?" Sometimes, when a sense of opportunity provokes reflection, the manager asks, "What can I make of this?" And sometimes, when a manager is surprised by the success of his own intuitive knowing, he asks himself, "What have I really been doing?" Whatever the triggering condition, a manager's reflectionin-action is fundamentally similar to reflection-in-action in other professional felds. It consists in on-the-spot surfacing, criticizing, restructuring, and testing of intuitive understandings of experienced phenomena; often it takes the form of a reflective conversation with the situation. But a manager's reflection-in-action also has special features of its own. A manager's professional life is wholly concerned with an organization which is both the stage for his activity and the object of his inquiry. Hence, the phenomena on which he reflects-in-action are the phenomena of organizational life. Organizations, furthermore, are repositories of cumulatively built-up knowledge: principles and maxims of practice, images of mission and identity, facts about the task environment, techniques of operation, stories of past experience which serve as exemplars for future action. When a manager reflects-in-action, he draws on this stock of organizational knowledge, adapting it to some present instance. And he also functions as an agent of organizational learning, extending or restructuring, in his present inquiry, the stock of knowledge which will be available for future inquiry. Finally, managers live in an organizational system which may promote or inhibit reflection-in-action. Organizational structures are more or less adaptable to new findings, more or less resistant to new tasks. The behavioral world of the organization, the characteristic pattern of interpersonal relations, is more or less open to reciprocal reflection-in-action—to the surfacing of negative information, the working out of conflicting views, and the public airing of organizational dilemmas. Insofar as organizational structure and behavioral world condition organizational inquiry, they make up what I will call the "learning system" of the organization. The scope and direction of a manager's reflection-in-action are strongly influenced, and may be severely limited, by the learning system of the organization in which he practices. These distinctively organizational aspects of a manager's reflection-in-action must enter into any good description of the art of managing. In the examples that follow, I shall sample a range of organizational phenomena with which reflective managers concern themselves: the problem of interpreting the external environment's response to organizational action, the diagnosis of signs of trouble within an organization, the process by which an organization learns from its experience, and the effects of an organizational learning system on the way in which organizational problems are set and solved. I shall limit myself to the experience of business firms, not because business managers are more reflective than others but because they are the source of my freshest examples. In the business context, the kinds of organizational phenomena noted above may be illustrated by the behavior of a market, the problems of a production plant, the acquisition of knowledge about product development, and the learning system of a product development organization. In all of these examples, I shall describe processes that managers often undertake but on which they seldom reflect. Managers do reflect-in-action, but they seldom reflect on their reflection-in-action. Hence this crucially important dimension of their art tends to remain private and inaccessible to others. Moreover, because awareness of one's intuitive thinking usually grows out of practice in articulating it to others, managers often have little access to their own reflection-in-action. The resulting mysteriousness of the art of managing has several harmful consequences. It tends to perpetuate the split in the field of management, creating a misleading impression. that practitioners must choose between practice based on management science and an essentially mysterious artistry. And it prevents the manager from helping others in his organization to learn to do what he can do. Since he cannot describe his reflection-in-action, he cannot teach others to do it. If they acquire the capacity for it, they do so by contagion. Yet one of a manager's most important functions is the education of his subordinates. For all of these reasons, it seems to me critically important to begin to describe how managers do reflect-in-action and how their reflection-in-action is limited. Interpreting market phenomena. A business firm is continually in interaction with its markets, and markets are often in a state of flux—some of which is induced by the action of the business firm itself. In the contemporary business setting, inquiry into market phenomena has become a specialized function in its own right. Market researchers and strategists have developed principles of marketing, models of market behavior, and techniques of market exploration and analysis. Nevertheless, much of what managers encounter in the marketplace resists the application of ready-made theories and procedures. Market research cannot say very much about consumer response to a radically new product. People cannot readily answer questions about their interest in something of which they have neither direct nor indirect experience. At best, if they are helped to carry out the imaginative feat of supposing themselves in possession of a nonexistent product, they may speculate on their future responses to it. But speculation of this sort is usually a very poor predictor of their behavior toward an actual product, more or less like the one described, which will appear one day, in a particular package and at a particular price, on supermarket shelves. If prototypes of the new product are produced (and it takes money to develop and produce them), then consumer panels may provide information from which managers can make inferences about actual market behavior. But the gap between panel response and market response is significant. Only with the introduction of large-scale market tests do manufacturers begin to get reliable information about market behavior, and regional market tests can also produce misleading results. At each stage of the development of a radically new product, managers must make investment decisions in the absence of adequate information or rules for rational decision. Each such judgment is a unique case, and the market tests, which may reduce uncertainty, come only at the price of further investment. The full-scale marketing of a product is also a test of sorts, and managers often find themselves confronted with surprising data that demand interpretation. Shortly after World War II, to take one rather celebrated example, the 3M Corporation put on the market a clear cellulose acetate tape, coated on one side with pressure-sensitive adhesive, which they called Scotch Tape. They had intended it for use as a book-mending material, a way of preserving things that would otherwise have to be thrown away; hence the name Scotch. But in consumers' hands, the product came to be used in many different ways, most of which had nothing to do with mending books. It was used to wrap packages, to fasten pictures to the wall, to make labels, to decorate surfaces, even to curl hair. 3M's managers did not regard these surprising uses as a failure of their initial marketing plan, nor did they merely accept them as a happy accident. They noticed them and tried to make sense of them as a set of messages about potential markets. The company began to market types of Scotch Tape specially designed for use in such applications as packaging, decorating, and hair curling. 3M's marketing managers treated their product as a projective test for consumers. They reflected on unanticipated signals from the marketplace, interpreted them, and then tested their interpretations by adapting the product to the uses that consumers had already discovered. But their tests were also moves aimed at strengthening market position and probes which might yield additional surprises. Their marketing process was a reflective conversation with consumers. Interpreting organizational troubles. When a manager first gets signals that something is going wrong in his organization, he usually has no clear, consensual account of the trouble. Various members of the organization, who occupy different positions and have different interests, tell different and often conflicting stories. If the manager is to take action, he must make some sense of the organizational Rashomon; but by inquiring into the situation, he also influences it. Hence he faces a twofold problem: how to find out what (if anything) is wrong, and how to do so in a way that enhances rather than reduces his ability to fix what is wrong. Consider a case drawn from the recent experience of a manufacturer of scientific instruments. The company, based in a developing country, was founded some fifteen years ago by a nuclear physicist who, with a small group of former students and colleagues, built a very narrow product line into a \$1oo million dollar business. The company's main offices are in its home country, but it has sales and service facilities in thirteen foreign countries. It has captured about 15 percent of the market in its field. The founder, now chairman of the board, attributes his success to two main principles: stay in close touch with the market, and deliver fast responses to changes in the field. From these two principles, many organizational consequences have been made to follow. In order to get product improvements to the market quickly, the company often puts instruments in the field before all development problems have been resolved. They depend on highly skilled technical servicemen to complete the development task. In order to achieve fast response to market demand, customers' orders are frequently changed. About 30 percent of all manufacturing orders are subject to engineering changes. As a result, manufacturing has become a highly sophisticated job shop where speed and flexibility take precedence over efficiency, which depends on long production runs. The company has deliberately refrained from establishing a fixed organizational structure. There are no organization charts. Roles are frequently overlapping and informal group problem solving is the norm. As the founder says, "This is no place for people who can't live with uncertainty." Role flexibility is carried to an extreme. The present vicepresident for finance is a former nuclear physicist who has learned finance as he might have learned a new branch of physics. And every member of the top-management team has filled virtually every major corporate function. The president of the company, G, who began with the company fifteen years ago, has worked in budgeting, finance, sales, and manufacturing. He is still regarded as "the best engineer in the company." Along with the founder and the vice-president for finance, he regards work as "fun,"likes to put "impossible" demands on himself, and expects others to do likewise. G is used to reaching down into the company to deal with whatever crisis presents itself. He has done this three or four times. Within the last year, for example, he spent three months at a computer console in order to resolve a critical software problem that threatened to stall a major new development. The crisis presently facing G concerns a new production plant established a year ago to make metal parts for instruments manufactured in the two main production facilities. It is located in a development zone of the country, where it is eligible for generous government subsidies, although it lacks access to labor force and services which would have been available in one of the larger cities. The new manager of the plant, M, has been hired away from a large electronics firm. He has been in his position for a year, and during that time there have been increasingly troublesome production delays. Recently one of the managers of the two main instrument plants brought the problem to G, who discussed it with the manager of the other instrument plant, the vice-president for manufacturing, and the manager of the new plant, M. The manager of the first plant describes the situation as follows: I want the parts on time and M wants efficiency! And I want 100 different kinds of parts. Opening the new plant caused a lot of crunches in our system. We worked night and day all last year to solve this problem. For a while, things were okay. Then, when the head of the metals section left because he couldn't get along with M, we had a big decline. M tried to manage the metals section by remote control. He should get in there and manage metals for himself. Or perhaps we should take the operation and bring it back to Central, in a metals shop of our own. M lacks the capacity to manage the problem. I see no light at the end of the tunnel. ## Manager of the second plant: M's is a new plant built around new people. There are communications problems, because people there don't adapt to flexible demands. M is pressed between demands for efficiency and for fast response, and he's not solving the problem. They need new staff functions. They have problems with orders because they don't know what's going on. They must see their raison d’etre as giving service to us, but they won't accept that definition. They are not equal. They feel second class. ## M, manager of the new plant: There's informal problem solving at Central, but between here and Central, it can't work. You have to have more rules, even with less flexibility, because as you grow, without new rules, you have a mess. G prefers that we use 50 percent of our capacity and hold people on standby to respond to orders when they come in, but that teaches people to be inefficient. And so I sell to outsiders, ## The Art of Managing: Reflection-in-Action but I have to give preference to the company. It's an axiom that you should produce efficiently, but I have to be inefficient in order to get the parts in on time. Management attention is split. Vice-president for manufacturing: Right now, the new plant is G's crisis. First we must clean up the channels of communication, providing better, more sophisticated management tools. And we must resolve the conflict of priorities. Most of the problems grow out of the frequent engineering changes which are vital to the company. Two-thirds of the problem is to get the right man in the right place. One of our main problems is a shortage of upper-middle management. The first plant manager, who brought the problem to G, says, I know G is working on the problem, because he hasn't erased all the figures we put on the blackboard! And he is right, G is working on the problem. G has listened to the several stories about the production delays at M's plant, but he has chosen not to decide among them or even to try to put them all together to make a single coherent picture of the trouble. He has read the Rashomon as a sign of two main difficulties: a lack of effective communication among the several parties, and a split between the new plant and central operations. He has seen his problem as one of creating a process to deal with these two difficulties. He has decided to treat the diagnosing of the problem as a central part of the resolution of the problem, and has assigned the task of diagnosis to those who are most centrally concerned. He has asked the vice-president for manufacturing, together with his staff of three, to spend two days a week at the new plant over the next three months. They will work with their counterparts there to trace the sources of delays, to review and repait reporting systems, to fix whatever problems in operations they discover. G has followed company traditions in turning the full force of management attention onto the crisis point. But this time he has not gone down to deal with the problem himself. He has seen his role as one of designing and putting in place a process to identify and fix the problem, leaving to others the task of working out their conflicting views of it. He has set up an organizational experiment, the essence of which is to bring into close interaction those who have been distant from one another. M has reacted favorably to this move. He says, "For the first time, I think they are learning what it is really like here. New capacity won't solve our problem; it will barely let us keep up with growth. But as the atmosphere improves and we get a better handle on the problems, we'll gradually remove the delays. I'm optimistic." And G says, "Perhaps as M comes to feel that people here understand his situation better, he will begin to feel more a part of the company, and then he may commit more fully to his frame of reference." G has responded to the organizational crisis by designing a process which will involve the key participants in collective reflection-in-action. Learning about product development. A large American consumer products firm has an extraordinary reputation as a developer of new products. Inside the firm, individual managers are very well aware of their corporate reputation, and attribute it to their success in learning about the process of conceiving, inventing, and commercializing new products. What is remarkable about this firm is the consciousness that managers bring to this process, the sense they have of being members of a corporate culture which includes a great deal of knowledge about it, and the extent to which each manager sees himself both as a user of the store of corporate knowledge and a contributor to it. It is possible to dig down into the firm at least four layers deep without losing access to the corporate reservoir of knowledge about product development. These are some examples of what product development managers believe they have learned. 1. "The target is a variable." One of the heads of technology remarks, "Product development is a game you can win, so long as you keep it open——so long as you remember you can redefine the target." Typically, a product development project is worked out among representatives of marketing, technology, and general management. Once a target has been defined, general management commits the necessary resources. But as development proceeds, technical people learn more about the feasibility of the initial target and more about the properties of the materials with which they are working. They discover unexpected difficulties in achieving the target originally chosen, and they also discover technical possibilities they had not suspected at the outset. They can redefine targets to reflect these discoveries, so long as they also understand the marketing implications of their redefinition of the target. Thus, in one project concerned with disposable paper products, the development director observes, "We found that the critical variable was not absorptive capacity but rate of absorption!" It was much more difficult to increase absorptive capacity than rate of absorption, but it was the latter that mattered most to the consumer. In the words of one researcher, "We knew we were on the right track when our panels no longer hated us!" In order to treat the target as a variable, the development team must be able to see a technical property of materials in termš of its meaning to consumers, and they must be able to see a marketing target in terms of the technical demands that follow from it. Such a team cannot afford a “"seesaw" between marketing and technology, in which marketing says to technology, "Make what we can sell!" or technology says to marketing, "Sell what we can make!" Technical and marketing specialists must be able to share the uncertainty which they convert to risk by redefining the development target. And, like the marketing managers at 3M, they must be willing to give up the assumption that they know the target, once and for all, at the beginning of the development process. As they discover new properties in the phenomena and new meanings in the responses of consumer panels, they learn to restructure not only the means but the ends of development. 2. "The unit of development is not a new product but a game with the competition." Members of the development team think of themselves as engaged in a game with the competition. For each major product line, there is a national market within which many companies struggle for position. Winning this game consists in establishing, maintaining, and extending market position at the expense of the competitors. Moves in the game consist in product improvements, advertising campaigns, and new product introductions. And for every move, competitors make counter moves. The game lasts for the duration of the life cycle of the product line. Playing the game well means forming and implementing a development strategy. A given development (a paper product with a higher rate of absorption, for example) is likely to trigger competitive developments, and good strategy includes anticipation of the likely countermoves. The development team tries to have in the wings a set of long-term developments which they can activate in response to competitors' moves, when the time is right. Thus, the unit of development is not an individual product but a full cycle of the competitive game. Within the game, however, there is always the question, "What is the situation now?" Depending on one's interpretation of the situation, construction of an appropriate strategy may vary significantly. In the case of the paper product described above, for example, there was a period in which the team believed that they had established the basic acceptability of their product and needed mainly to get the price down. But a competitor introduced a new product which came in at a higher price and achieved greater consumer acceptance than theirs. How should they interpret their situation in the game? A corporate vice-president made the suggestion, "Why don't you come up with a Cadillac?" This was surprising to the development team, because it ran counter to their strategy. They did not reject it out of hand, however. They waited to see what the market would do. Then, as they said, "When we discovered that our product was holding its own among the low-priced brands, we were freed to work on the Cadillac. Had we brought out a low-priced improvement, we would have cannibalized our own brand." The new signals from the marketplace enabled the development team to construct a new picture of their situation, one which required them to revise their understanding of their position relative to other brands. And from the new description of the situation, they evolved a new strategy which they would test with the introduction of the "Cadillac"(a familiar metaphor which, like "cannibalizing," is a part of the repertoire they bring to their inquiry). 3. "The important thing is to keep the dialectic moving." It is unusual to find the term "dialectic" in common usage within a corporate culture. But in this corporation, managers talk freely about dialectic, by which they mean the surfacing and working out of conflicting views among participants in the development process. The vice-president of technology goes so far as to define his role in terms of the dialectic. He says, "I feel good when I see that engineering and development, advertising and manufacturing, are really surfacing and talking about their differences. It's my job to keep the dialectic alive." And a general manager says, "You must keep the conflicts alive and on the surface. Once you have identified the conflicts, you see to it that they resolve them and that they let you know the results. If they agree ahead of time, too quickly, that can shield you from legitimate conflict. It breaks your heart when you see people have stopped talking about it." The expectation is that "legitimate conflicts" will surface. The complexity of development situations is such that engineering and research, advertising and manufacturing, general management and finance, will have different and conflicting views of situation and strategy, all of which are important to the organization. A manager's task is to make sure that such conflicts are neither surpressed nor circumvented. Organizational learning about a present situation, and about product development more generally, depends on the "working out" of such conflicts. But no one can say ahead of time how they will be worked out, which will depend on the reciprocal reflection-in-action of the parties to the conflict. ## Limits of the Organizational Learning System The very same company that is so conscious of organizational learning about product development also provides a very good example of the ways in which an organizational learning system may constrain reflection-in-action. As a consultant to this organization, I was asked to address the problem of the "burn-out" of product development directors. These individuals, who work at the intersection of general management, advertising, and research, are hard to find, expensive to develop, and difficult to keep. They experience an unusually high incidence of alcoholism, health problems, divorce, and mental breakdown, and the vice-president for technology wanted to know why. We agreed that my study would take the form of an analysis of a case of product development—Product X, as I will call it, a product for use in household appliances. The story of Product X was already famous in the company when I began my study. Nearly everyone described it in the same way: "A case in which we nearly failed because of problems we ought to have anticipated and dealt with better than we did. But we came through and bailed ourselves out." Initially, there were three questions about the case: . Why were we so late in detecting and admitting the problems? . Why were we so unwilling to ask for help and to accept help once it was offered? . How did we bail ourselves out? The product had originated in a "brainstorming" session where development specialists had asked themselves, "What benefits can we deliver through products designed for use in household appliances?" When they had arrived at a basic product definition, they began to explore the technologies they would need, and they hit on a particular technology, owned by a private inventor, which they could turn to their purposes. Their development process proceeded, as usual in this company, 'through a series of tests. They tested the product's effectiveness in delivering its intended benefit, and they tested it for possible harmful side effects. The testing process began in the laboratory where, for example, standard corrosion tests were performed by immersing steel plates in a bath made up of the product's components. And the process continued through "blind"tests with consumer panels (a standard element in all of their development processes), and finally to regional test markets. It is important to note that a successful passage through such a sequence of standard tests functioned, in this company, as an essential part of the dialogue between technical development specialists and general managers. The general managers, who controlled the commitment of resources, depended on the results of standard tests to make their decisions. The product performed very well in panel tests, and was placed in its first regional test market. Two months into the test market, however, an appliance company which had been asked to test the product sent back word, "This product can get stuck in the machine, and if it does, you can get overheating. There is a risk of fire."Members of the development team at first said, "We don't think so." But the appliance company wrote a formal, threatening letter to general management: "If you market this product, we'll put stickers on our machines telling people not to use it." With this exposure of the problem, everyone started to talk about it. General management, who had known nothing of the problem, were furious. Three different task groups were set up and they arrived at two different solutions. Both of these were subsequently accepted and incorporated in a new version of the product. But this created a new problem. What should be done with the existing test market? The old product had been successful in consumer panel blind tests, and general management said, "We'll keep the old test market going. It's the origi nal product we invested in. It passed our tests." The technical group nearly mutinied. But general management took the position, "We can assume a liability if we want to; your job is to tell us the odds." The sense of general management's position was, "The product is a black box. We make decisions about things that pass our tests. But we don't take the cover off the box because we get confused."And the sense of the technical group's position was, "We make decisions about particulars, not general probabilities. We understand what it is that makes a product pass tests. And we don't always trust the tests!" A year later, the first test market was dropped and a new one, based on the revised product, was instituted. But technical people felt that the issue had “put them into short pants." At this point, the development was some two years old, with \$30 million invested. A second major embarrassment occurred in the midst of the second test market. The product had been doing well, when a sprinkling of complaints came in from the field to the effect that the product caused rust in appliances. These complaints came in after the "sticking" problem, and after the laboratory immersion tests which had revealed no rusting. The technical team chose to ignore the complaints. The rusting detected by a few users of the product must have been produced by other causes. Members of the corporate research laboratory who heard about the problem took a different view. One member of the research group lathered some of the product's ingredients on a tin can and left it overnight; in the morning the can had rusted. The researchers took the rusted can to the vice-president for technology, who said, "There's no red light. Don't worry about it. We can handle it." But as letters from the field multiplied,'the laboratory team became convinced that the rusting effect was real. They developed a model that would explain the rusting process, used X-ray spectroscopy to test the model, and brought in high-powered consultants from a university. The product development team reacted by asking, “"Are you really sure of this? Why are you doing this to us? Why don't you do something constructive?" The laboratory group was disillusioned. The head of the laboratory sent out a memo which forbade researchers to do more work on Product X. At this point, however, the vice-president for technology fired the head of the development team and appointed a researcher from the laboratory to become the new head. This man quickly satisfied himself, with the help of his former colleagues in the laboratory, that the rusting effect was real. This produced a new crisis. The vice-president for technology then held a meeting with members of the two teams. At this meeting he said, "Are you guys men enough to keep this problem from general management and go ahead on faith, without knowing that you can really do it, to make an alternative work?" This set in motion a new process which led, eventually, to solution of the rusting problem. The laboratory group, who had been told not to work on the problem, continued to do so. They came up with a new ingredient which they believed not only solved the rusting problem but actually protected machines. The product development team criticized them for "shooting from the hip"and "overstepping their bounds."But the new head of the laboratory team proposed a technical-political compromise: the new ingredient was to be combined with 10 percent of the old. New tests showed that the rusting effect had been overcome and the product worked as well as ever. As one member of the laboratory group said, "It was all played out under the tent, for fear of tipping off general management and breaking their commitment to the product. But at each replay of the problem there was the same issue: Did the new element really work? What about negative side effects? It was a guerrilla war, and we used science as a weapon." The interactions between product development team and research laboratory can be represented as a cycle of action and reaction, roughly as follows. The product development team sought to protect themselves, to control the task and territory, and to win credit for their work and credibility with general management. To these ends, they • resisted the problems pointed out by the laboratory, • discredited the laboratory findings, . kept them in their place by confining them to narrow and unimportant problems, . kept their own work quiet. The laboratory team became angry and frustrated, distrusted the product development team, and felt a low sense of their own worth. They retaliated by . taking an aggressive stance as they proved their points . seeking to win through science, . continuing to work on the problem even when the boss told them not to, . trying to capture the task, . circumventing product development to get to management. These strategies made the product development team angry, frustrated, fearful, and distrustful, and reinforced them in their efforts to win and protect themselves The consequences of the cycle were wasted effort, dupli cated work, and delay in the recognition of problems. The product development team could not, under these circumstances, ask for help nor use it when it was offered. As the cycle amplified, researchers and developers were less and less able to work together. But management injected stopgap solutions. They shifted people around and they intervened directly at moments of crisis. The pattern was one of "heroism under a tent." To quote some of the observations of the participants, "Three people told me not to work on Product X, but I wouldn't stop," "Don't tell management what you're doing," "Fix the problem first, then tell them about it." What accounts for such a pattern? In order to answer this question, we must turn to the larger context in which the research/development cycle arose. For researchers and developers were involved in a more comprehensive process which I shall call "the product development game." The game has mainly to do with four variables: corporate commitment, credibility, confidence, and competence. In order to set a new product in motion, general management must commit the necessary resources. But management commitment is deliberately made hard to win. This is partly a matter of thoroughness. As one of the managers said, "We're a very thorough company; we do our research well, and we don't accept just anything."But management commitment is also hard to win because managers tend to distrust research and development. As one manager said, "They are likely to fimflam and fool us if we're not careful." On the other hand, managers are aware of their dependence on research and development. They know that corporate growth depends on it. Thus managers must commit to a process which they distrust. They respond by making the commitment of resources hard to win; and once resources are committed, they hold the product development director wholly accountable for performance, loading him with the full burden of uncertainty. And the maintenance of corporate commitment becomes touchier as investment in the product increases and the company becomes more exposed. Under these circumstances, product development people try to win the game by gaining and retaining management commitment, while maintaining their own credibility within the company. A participant's credibility behaves like a stock on the stock market, going up or down with the perception of his success or failure. There is a corporate market for credibility. Each person strives to maintain his credibility at all costs, because a loss of credibility can make it impossible for him to perform. As the former head of the product development team reported, "When the problems hit the fan, my credibility was shot and I was dead in the company." Confidence and competence are closely tied together. An individual has a "confidence tank" whose level rises or falls, depending on his perception of his status in the company. Credibility, commitment, confidence, and competence are interdependent, in this sense: "The more credibility I have, the more confident I can be." "The more confident I am, the more confident I appear." "The more confident I appear, the more I am seen as credible and competent." ## Conversely, "If I lose credibility, I may lose confidence," "If I lose confidence, I appear to be incompetent and I lose more credibility." As a result, the company is full of very confident-seeming people. It is seen as necessary to appear to be confident, no matter what the problems are, in order to maintain credibility. Indeed, old hands in technology management advise younger ones along the following lines: "Tęll management enough of what you're doing to capture commitment, but not enough to make them uneasy. Commit yourself to do the things that are necessary, even if you're not sure you can do them. And do the work you see to be necessary, even if your boss says no." Thus heroism and secrecy (mastery and mystery) are essential elements of the strategy for winning the product development game. The game yields a double bind, even for winners. It puts the players into a situation in which they lose, eventually, whatever the consequences. A participant says to himself, "I must commit to what I'm not sure I can do, in order to secure corporate commitment. To this end, I lay my credibility on the line, without which I cannot function. So I must be heroic and secretive. If I fail, I lose big. But unless I play, I cannot win." But old-time managers say, "If you're up, you can stay up, and it's a winnable game, because there's plenty of resource and time and room for the redefinition of targets, if you have the competence and the confidence. But you must keep it up." So product-development is a high-wire act in which you eventually fall. Moreover, you don't whine or complain, because you would be seen to lack confidence. The effect is to put product development directors, those who occupy the pivotal position between general managers and the laboratory, under a great deal of strain. They strive to protect their own credibility, keeping problems "under a tent," with the result that in midstream, problems tend to be ignored. In order to retain corporate commitment, the product is changed as little as possible. Once a problem has been exposed, however, they "climb all over it." And they strive to retain ownership of the task, which makes them treat offers of help as though they were threats to security. In the light of this product development game, most of the questions with which the case study began can be given plausible answers. It is clear why problems encountered in midstream tend to be ignored until they are unavoidable, and it is also clear why, upon unavoidable exposure, they are “"oversolved." It is clear how the corporation bails itself out of its crises, through stopgap “"patching" solutions which resolve the crisis at hand without affecting the underlying processes that produce crises. It is also clear how product development directors are placed under extraordinary stress, which might well cause them to "burn out." Considered more broadly as an organizational learning system, the product development game determines the directions and the limits of reflection-in-action. When crises present themselves, managers subject them to inquiry—often with successful results—but they do not reflect publicly on the processes which lead to such crises, for this would surface the games of deception by which product development deals with general management. While these games are "open secrets" within the organization, they are not publicly discussable. Managers reflect on the strategies by which product development can be made into a "winnable game". But neither general managers nor product development directors reflect on the Model I theories-in-use which create the conditions for the game. All participants try to achieve their objectives as they see them: general managers, to keep the burden of uncertainty on the shoulders of product development; product development directors, to retain corporate commitment while maintaining their own credibility. Each participant tries to protect himself unilaterally from being tagged with failure and from the resulting loss of credibility. Each seeks to gain unilateral control over the situation, to win and avoid losing in a situation he perceives as irretrievably win/lose. And each one withholds negative information from the other, as long as he believes it is a winning strategy to do so. Participants may be aware of these strategies, particularly as they are evinced by other players in the game, but they do not subject them to public reflection-in-action. To do so would be to make oneself vulnerable in an intensely win/lose world and, in the context of the product development game, might look like a failure of confidence. This is not to say, however, that members of the organization are not able to recognize the game when it is described for them. When the results of the study of Product X were presented to those who had been involved in the story, there was a generally favorable reaction. Although most participants had never put the whole picture together for themselves, they recognized its validity. Some were highly amused. They seemed to feel that the study elaborated the open secret with which they were all familiar. But with very few exceptions, they did not believe that the system was susceptible to change. The risks seemed too great, the stakes too high, and the chances of success too low. ## The Art of Managing and Its Limits Returning now to the questions with which we began this chapter, let us consider the lessons that may be drawn from the several examples of managerial practice which have occupied our attention. It is clear that managers do sometimes reflect-in-action. Beginning with questions like, What do consumers really see in our product? What's really going on underneath the signs of trouble in our organization? or What can we learn from our encounters with the competition? managers sometimes try to make sense of the unique phenomena before them. They surface and question their intuitive understandings; and in order to test their new interpretations, they undertake on-the-spot experiments. Not infrequently, their experiments yield surprising results that cause them to reformulate their questions. They engage in reflective conversations with their situation. The reflection-in-action of managers is distinctive, in that they operate in an organizational context and deal with organizational phenomena. They draw on repertoires of cumulatively developed organizational knowledge, which they transform in the context of some unique situation. And as they function as agents of organizational learning, they contribute to the store of organizational knowledge. G's inquiry into production delays becomes a corporate exemplar for diagnosis of the troubles of the internal environment. In the consumer products firm, managers build up a corporate repertoire of cases, maxims, and methods which becomes accessible to new generations of managers. But managers function as agents of organizational learning within an organizational learning system, within a system of games and norms which both guide and limit the directions of organizational inquiry. The case of Product X reveals a learning system that creates a pattern of corporate crises and at the same time prohibits public reflection-in-action on their causes. As a consequence, the organizational learning system becomes immune to reflection-in-action. It is not publicly discussable; and because managers do not discuss it, they are often unable to describe it—although they may recognize the descriptions constructed by an outsider to the organization. Public discussion of the product development game would reveal the strategies by which general managers distance themselves from the uncertainties inherent in product development and the complementary strategies by which technical personnel protect themselves against the loss of corporate commitment. To reveal these strategies publicly, in an actual present instance where some action might be taken, would violate the norms of the product development game and would carry a perceived risk of vulnerability and loss of control. Thus organizational learning systems, of the sort revealed by the case of Product X, become diseases that prevent their own cure. Managers could not extend the scope of reflectionin-action to their own learning systems without transforming the theories of action which they bring to their lives within the organization. And these, under the normal conditions of corporate life, are also immune to reflection-in-action. We might begin to heal the split in the field of management if we were to recognize that the art of management includes something like science in action. When practicing managers display artistry, they reveal their capacity to construct models of unique and changing situations, to design and execute onthe-spot experiments. They also reveal a capacity to reflect on the meanings of situations and the goals of action. A more comprehensive, useful, and reflective management science could be built by extending and elaborating on what skillful managers actually do. Practitioners might then become not only the users but the developers of management science. But extending and elaborating on artistry means reflecting on artistry and its limits, that is, on the ways in which managers do reflect-in-action and on the theories-in-use and organizational learning systems that constrain them. 