## DESIGN AND BUSINESS PERFORMANCE T sustains the development of design in the economy. In most countries, thegovernment encourages design through financial aid and professional sustains the development of design in the economy. In most countries, the government encourages design through financial aid and professional quality certification systems, education, and partnerships between design schools and industries. ## The Government’s Role in Promoting Design There is national promotion of design structures in countries all over the world. The international design center in Nagoya, Japan, established in 1992, is financed by the Japanese government and 103 Japanese corporations, and develops international competitions. Britain and Denmark have active design centers that organize exhibitions, edit publications, or finance research. Korea and Taiwan also have national design policies. The British Design Council conducted a national survey in 2001 to find out how design, innovation, and creativity had contributed to various firms. Below are listed the percentage of companies that agreed that these attributes had impacted on various aspects of company culture: Increased turnover 51%Improved image of company 50%Increased profits 48% Increased employment 46%Improved communications with customers 45%Improved quality of services/products 44%Increased market share 40%Development of new products 40%Improved internal communications 28%Reduced costs 25% The survey determined that in Britain, as of this writing, 76,000 designers are working in 4,000 design agencies. Design is often supported through national programs. Countries develop policies to support and promote design. Financial subventions through grants are allocated to managers. Exhibitions and design research programs are organized, and support is given to design publications. ## ZBYNEK VOKROUHLICKY, MANAGER Design Centrum of the Czech Republic (DCCR), 2001 “The Czech Republic must be able to compete outside our own borders in the world market. We realize that design can play a crucial role as a tool to increase the quality of our industrial products and thus their competitiveness in the world marketplace. “Each year DCCR organizes several competitions and a program targets SMEs [Small Medium Enterprises], and offers financial assistance and consulting to improve production processes and to integrate design in the corporate strategy. The design program attempts to bring together skilled designers with companies needing their help.” Design can be used as a political tool. For example, a recent program in Britain, “Design Against Crime,” called for design research aimed at crime prevention and creating a reduction in crime in British companies. Regional design promotion centers are highly active. They provide expert advice and audit in favor of SMEs. Firms that want to work with a designer can solicit advice from a design management consultant or from a technology transfer innovation consultant. ## MAGUY GABILLARD, DIRECTOR Centre Design Rhône Alpes (CDRA), France “To encourage a more effective use of design resources, the CDRA provides services, actions, and tools to inform companies, explain what is involved by design, and facilitate implementation in collaboration with professional designers of the region. . . . “The distinctive feature of our business lies essentially in our networking operations. . . . Our determination to adopt a procedure of participation and to federate our partners around our operations demands a spirit of mutuality and great methodological rigor. This is what led to the success of our operations like our participation in the Saint Etienne Biennial. “The future of design management hangs on the demonstrated value of the design function, on the clarity of its links with the other functions of a company. From our point of view it is by initiating a dialogue on the managerial aspects of design and by developing research that those who manage design in business will bring true managerial value to their companies.” Many design competitions aim at developing creativity in a particular industry (such as optical instruments, clock and watchmaking, and automobiles). They are also launched by manufacturers who solicit designers to imagine new applications for their technologies, or by firms that are strategic design leaders in their industry (such as Braun). ## Design as a Profession The design profession actively participates in the national economy. In the late nineties, agencies recovered growing rates, took advantage of the reconfiguration of their clients, and benefited from their international strategies. In France, the largest design agencies are Dragon Rouge, CB’a, Landor, D/g\* (Desgrippes Gobé), Extreme Design, Architral, and Carré Noir. Most of their consultancies are part of communication groups that allow them to work on an international basis. Seven out of the eight largest design agencies in the world are British, and they gain a significant amount of their business in export markets. The Design Management Institute in the United States conducted a survey of its professional members (based on questionnaires from 136 design agencies and 114 corporate companies, 195 of which were in the U.S. and Canada, and fifty-five were outside North America), which offers the following information about the design profession: / Seventy-five percent of the designers were male. / Forty-eight percent of the U.S. respondents had bachelor’s degrees and an annual compensation of between \$50,000 and \$125,000; 17 percent earned more than \$200,000. / Non-U.S. respondents had the same proportion of bachelor’s and master’s degrees. / No respondent under the age of thirty earned more than \$100,000. / Ninety percent of the companies outsourced design to a certain degree. / Design ability, competency, and excellence of design work were the most important criteria for selecting a design agency. Other criteria were also essential: understanding the brand or the company, cost efficiency, portfolio and references, creativity, and human relations (i.e., partnerships). / The responsibilities of the in-house design department included communication and marketing materials, new products and redesigns, brand management strategy and corporate identity, preparing all presentations, design management, and interface design. / Primary expertise was in graphic design, brand identity, and design strategy in both design agencies and corporate companies. / Sixty-one percent ran the design policy at the corporate division level. / Design culture was rated as “good” in 34 percent and “excellent” in 15 percent of the companies. / Design agencies obtained 39 percent of their clients from direct personal contact and 38 percent from referrals. / Most design consultancies reported to the CEO, vice president, director of marketing, or senior management. / Forty-four percent of the respondents managed between one and ten people. / All respondents liked their jobs because they found them challenging and interesting and because they worked with a variety of people. / Design agencies’ expectations for the future were more optimistic than corporate companies’, 62 percent to 33 percent. / The biggest challenges for design were thought to be the downturn of the economy and the maintenance of business during crisis. (See www.dmi.org for more information about this survey.) Companies that share their design strategies are rare, and the same firms will be mentioned in the business press again and again. The way design is perceived by the press has changed over the years, from design as the “beauty” that helps to gain market shares to design as “the art of innovation” and “the art of waking up the consumer” to a new strategic dimension, or design as good business. Development perspectives for the design profession are good, since consumers look for differences and for products that mirror the intimate expression of their relationships with others. In their buying behavior, consumers search for aesthetic satisfaction as well as performance satisfaction. Traditionally, functional design in such sectors as electrical or audiovisual products now incorporates semantics, emotion, and pleasure dimensions. It is difficult to describe the impact of the design profession because a designer’s edge is everywhere—in the packaging of our consumer goods, in our mobile phones, in our furniture and fashion, and in the stores we patronize. However, design has always been at the forefront of the avant-garde and its radical changes in forms will be imitated in other fields. “We have finished with industrial design. We want cars with emotions,” said the design manager of Mazda. The credo of Hartmut Esslinger, founder of the FrogDesign agency in Germany, is, “Form follows emotion.” Design is art as much as it is a marketing strategy. Design is about raising domestic objects to the rank of art objects. The trend at the beginning of the twenty-first century is toward porosity and permeability between economic sectors. For example, in fashion, a sector in which design is traditionally associated with avant-garde and creativity, designers claim a rational approach to the production process. In furniture, design “stars” develop prototypes, as well as objects for mail-order catalogs. Design reserved for an elite group disappears. Society at large is asking for designers’ input. Companies turn to designers because they capture better than anyone the air of the time: the cosmetics for Nina Ricci by Garouste and Bonetti, for instance. Design is the cultural barometer of postmodern times. Products express the emerging values and aspirations of consumers. If the design profession is bound to play a more and more important role, it is because it participates in the development of our economies and is linked to mutations in the international and digital environment. The development of design depends upon intra- and international economics; it is, therefore, dangerous for the profession to disregard macroeconomic issues. Design has some indirect effects on indicators of international competition— such as technology, research and development (R&D), and the commercial balance of trade—but also on a country’s social equilibrium, collective well-being, and consumption levels. Design develops a demand for impulse and renewal products (such as automobiles and fashion) that stimulates national consumption. Demand in graphic and package design is sustained by the development of multilevel brand concepts: the internationalization of branding and its corollaries in a global marketing policy, as well as the multinational brand and its corollaries in local markets. Design is a tool for globalization publicity: “Think globally, act locally.” A larger European market, for example, multiplied alliances while it also created new strategic marketing programs that generated demand for European brand design. Mutations in our economies generate a demand for design. Designers are not conscious enough of this macroeconomic determinism. Competition is now on a worldwide scale. Strategies become both national and global, and design agencies are obliged to think globally. They participate in world competition—the global village—which holds that a good concept is good everywhere. ## Design and Macroeconomic Issues ## Design contributes to the success of an economy on various levels: / Design agencies generate profits and tax revenues. / The improved performances of manufactured products in the world market sharpen the competitive edge of a country’s output. / Design agencies develop service industries abroad. (For example, the majority of British design agencies do between 10 and 30 percent of their business abroad). / The development of the service sector—bank services and insurance; leisure, including tourism and hotels; transportation; and chain stores—drives the demand for environmental design, retail conception, graphics, and signage. Every innovation, whether radical or incremental, requires the input of design. Just as any invention generates different formal configurations and successive modifications, the majority of product design is based on past inventions and incremental innovations: In fact, 90 percent of product design is incremental innovation (Rothwell & Gardiner, 1984). Research demonstrates that the evolutionary improvement of past innovations and existing design is a more reliable strategy for success than trying to introduce new innovative products (although as of now, there is a trend toward rediscovering “radical innovation”). Design plays an important role in the secondary phase of innovation, as well as in the concept phase of radical invention (Walsh, 1992) and in the qualitative policy to improve products (Riedel et al., 1996). The degree of innovation in an industry correlates to the degree of design input, just as the management of innovation in an industry correlates to the success of its design (Roy et al., 1986). ## MARC SADLER, DESIGNER “We are the guarantors of technicity and taste, we must master these fields as well as an orchestra conductor: without being an expert of every instrument, we must know them all to give with talent and precision the signal at the exact right instant.” The arrival of a new technology generates a multiplicity of design solutions that later tend toward a common and convergent dominant design. This convergence does not exclude the diverse aesthetic solutions that arise. The integration of a technology into an industry entails changes in forms (Walsh, 1992). When an industrial sector develops itself, the demand for secondary innovations and competitive designs increases. Technology plays a major role in our societies. It affects production structures and employment, as well as social evolution. Design participates in the innovation and transfer of new technologies, as well as in the revitalization of a region (Lovering, 1995; Guimaraes et al., 1996). The creative process is a precious tool for technology’s transfer from the economic sector to the consumer, and for structuring technological channels in the economy (Ayral, 1994). If designers are not inventors, they diffuse new material and new technology throughout society and accelerate the sociological acceptance of technology. Their creativity stimulates innovation at the cultural level and on the corporate level by inspiring companies to push the limits in new product development. ## ANDREW HARGADON, 2001 “Consider the strategic role of design, the emergent arrangement of concrete details that embodies an idea, in mediating between innovations and the established institutions they must confront. “Taking as an example the prototypical innovation of Edison’s system of electric lighting by looking carefully at the relationship between Edison’s design decisions and the existing institutions he sought to change, historical analysis generates insights into how the grounded details of an innovation’s design shapes both its initial acceptance and its ultimate impact. “Robust design explains how Edison’s design strategy successfully gained acceptance as an innovation that would ultimately displace the existing institutions of the gas industry. “Edison’s design strategy selectively chose which elements of his system of electric lighting to present as new, which to present as old and familiar, and which to hide from view altogether. By doing so Edison designed a technological innovation that was simultaneously revolutionary and familiar, allowing entrepreneurs to simultaneously exploit existing institutions while retaining the flexibility to ultimately displace them. “The design of the new Volkswagen Beetle is not to replicate history but to allude to it. Design mediates between technologies in the abstract and social systems. When a technology emerges a social process follows. The role of design is then to arrange the concrete details that embody an innovation in ways that construct people’s interpretations of novelty from pieces of what are old and familiar to them.” The economic competitiveness of a country is measured by its capacity to innovate as well as to undertake research. Industrial design is factored into R&D budgets. Patents or protected brand names fall under product and package design operations. Investment raised in R&D, for example—and particularly in applied research—explains Japan’s economic success: this engagement helped design penetrate industry. The worldwide success of Scandinavian Designs is due to a political involvement in R&D investments to sustain industries in which they could develop a world competitive advantage through design (Walsh et. al, 1992). Design is not neutral or apolitical: it is dictated by commercial and political interests. Design can be held responsible for products that don’t satisfy basic human needs, therefore, contradicts its ideology. Designers are subjected to and influenced by the ideas of the society in which they live. The deviations are not their only responsibility (Forty, 1986). Author Victor Papanek criticizes industrial design producing toys for adults that make them forget the problems of the real world. He believes it is the design profession’s responsibility to put forth projects that are justified in terms of social utility and value. (See his book, Design for the Real World [1991], in which he talks about green design, or the spiritual dimension of design.) The social value of design is part of professional ethics. It emerges concretely in macroeconomic issues in terms of a country’s level of well-being. Designers invent solutions for collective lodgings, schools, hospitals, and urban facilities. Design plays a social and collective role by giving shape to human aspirations; it reflects and reinforces social values and can contribute to modifying prejudices in human relations. More and more women have become product designers, which should improve a good portion of the products conceived by men, who are often unaware of the real needs of the final consumer. The postmodern individual’s quest for identity expresses itself in the creation of social ties. Design services have to think of how to give form to social interfaces (Cova, 1994). Léon Burckhardt speaks of “Design beyond the visible,” or of conscious design that considers artifacts and human relations together. Throughout its history, design has always taken into consideration the evolution of society. Stephano Marzano, design director at Philips, states: “Design is a political act. Every time we draw a product, we make a statement about the direction the world takes.” Ezio Manzini of Domus Academy speaks of the autonomous culture of design, which is not the business culture, and must create the “aesthetics of the bearable.” Tables 3.2 and 3.3 (at the end of this chapter) sum up studies made on the macroeconomic impact of design. Table 3.2 analyzes the effect of design on the efficiency of an economic sector. Table 3.3 analyzes the effect of design on exports. ## The Impact of Design on Exports Design can be an offensive weapon in the international market. Smoby, considered number one in the toy industry in France, has stated that “savoir-faire, savoir être, et faire savoir” (“know-how, identity, and making it known”) are the imperatives of industry: design is the capacity to assert know-how and generate brand value with a global strategy of products, packaging, and brand communication. In France, for example, the ministry of industry goes as far as advising French firms that wish to develop in the Japanese market, reputedly difficult to enter, to make their designs appealing because design speaks to the needs of the Japanese consumer. In Japan, the foreign firm must communicate its values, cultural heritage, and qualities. Design is an adequate tool to adapt to this market (Anselin, 1998). Competition is high in the world economy. Several economic studies have shown that Europe has endured increased imported goods penetration. Some of the studies blame the poor sales of European-made objects on weakness of design (Corfield, 1979; Roy et al., 1990) or the negative perception of a country’s product design in overseas markets (Cooper, 1993). Studying the export and import rate of a country measures the strength of its economy. The general deterioration of European commercial balance in favor of imports from Asia is well known. Sectors of activity where the market share is the most damaged are the automobile and electronics industries. This deterioration can be explained by the lower price of imported products. But it also shows that consumers choose some foreign products because they offer a level of quality and performance that consumers perceive as superior. Therefore, one can see a correlation between the positive commercial balance of trade of an industry and its high degree of design investment (Sentance et al., 1997) or between the export rate and the success of design (Potter et al., 1991; Roy et al., 1986). The validity of the neoclassical model is contested by the importance in international competition of non-price factors like innovation and quality of service. Countries search for a competitive advantage that permits the production of good products—qualitatively different, more sophisticated technically, and of better design (Rothwell, 1983). Design creates this competitive advantage. Design has a direct effect on competitiveness concerning price; margin; nonprice factors such as performances, originality, appearance, finish, reliability, durability, and security; and service factors such as point-of-sale presentation, packaging, maintenance, and time of development and delivery (Rothwell & Gardiner, 1984; Roy, 1990; Walsh et al., 1992) or semantic product value (Paul, 1999). Competition valorizes creation (Hetzel & Wissmeier, 1991) and the improvement of the product’s non-price factors. A majority of managers consider efficient design management to be of increasing importance on a national level (Butcher, quoted by Gorb, 1988). Since 1996, the Design Council of Great Britain has launched a new strategy that insists on the development of research and education in order to transform design ideas into competitive realities (Dumas, 1996). In 1998, a new action called “Creative Britain” centered around the designer-entrepreneur James Dyson. The objective was to create a nation in which the creative talents of all are used to construct an economy for the twenty-first century in which “one competes on brains and not on muscles.” ## The Impact of Design on Business Success The subject of the potential links between company performance and design generated a varied body of research largely conducted by the Design Innovation Group in Britain following governmental programs on design promotion. This analysis of design and business success articulates four themes (Table 3.4): 1. The economic value of design 2. The integration process of design 3. The importance of top management attitudes toward design 4. The classification of design strategy ## Design: A Profitable Investment Research provides evidence of a correlation between company performance and design management (Walsh et al., 1988). The Design Innovation Group studies conducted in several sectors of the British economy in comparison to international sectors have shown that “design-conscious” firms have better results in terms of sales growth and profit rate (Roy, 1990; Walsh et al., 1992; Press, 1995; Hertenstein & Platt, 2002) and that they do a better job of managing design: for example, they have a formalized design brief and a person responsible for design at the top management level. Design is a profitable investment because the return on investment is less than three years, with an average period of fifteen months (Potter et. al, 1991; Ministère de l’Industrie, 1995; Walsh, 1995). When a company works with a designer for the first time, it is most likely that the design projects will be launched with success. The impact of design on business performance is measured first by its impact on sales (Sentance & Clarke, 1997; Press, 1995), then on product price or perceived value. There is a correlation between receiving a design award and a potential margin increase and export rate. Companies use design to position themselves in upscale markets (Riedel et al., 1996) or in markets with high added value (Walsh et al., 1992). The success of a design policy is measured by: / The improvement of the perceived value of products (Walsh & Roy, 1983) / The increase in sales and selling price (Arbonies, 1996) Companies insist on the contribution of product design in their analyses of the link between design and business performance. Design allows for the penetration of a new market or the increase of a present market share (Walsh, 1995). ## The Integration Process of Design The integration process of design into the business setting can be disturbed by managers’ behaviors and power struggles (Kotler & Rath, 1984). Business performance is correlated to the attitude of top management toward design and the decision to encourage simultaneously a design policy and a marketing policy (Hart and Service, 1988). Design is a process that never stops (Roy et al., 1990), and design management is essential to the success of a firm’s innovation policy (Walsh et al., 1988; Roy et al., 1986). Using design generates success, and this success sets up an integration process in three ways: 1. The functional integration of design in product development 2. The visual integration of design in the culture and creation of a company brand identity 3. The conceptual integration of design in business strategy and the company mission (Svengren, 1995) CHRISTOPHER LORENZ ## The Design Dimension, 1986 “Towards a new era: design, marketing, and technology as equal partners” “In these circumstances where interdepartmental friction, time, cost, and risk must all be minimized, the synthesizing, integrating, and communicating skills of the industrial designer are becoming especially valuable. But the designer can also play a central part in helping the company take the sort of risks which are increasingly imperative in today’s ultra-competitive environment. Here it is the industrial designer’s imagination, as well as the skill to make connections, which is of paramount importance.” ## Design Management Issues ## The Differences in Design Management Styles Firms differ in their design management policies according to their position on four key variables: identification of design responsibility, design experience, strategic positioning, and design integration: 1. Design responsibility: One key issue that affects the quality of a company’s design management is whether or not that company has a person who is responsible for design, as well as responsible for implementing design training programs (Press, 1995). 2. Design experience: Depending upon the amount of experience it has with design, management sees design as a resource to develop in the future, or as a resource without engagement in the future, or is undecided (Price et al., 1995). 3. Strategic positioning: When the company’s strategic positioning is reactive, the market determines the company design policy; when proactive, the firm is able to influence the market and views design as a tool to create new demand, which entails some organizational change in the management of innovation (Hart et al., 1989). 4. Design integration in the company’s value chain: design as economic competence (its effect is on the firm’s primary functions); design as managerial competence (its effect is on the support functions); design as strategic competence (its effect on the external value chain) (Borja de Mozota, 2002). ## Measuring Design Management Design management performance is measured by financial and nonfinancial measures (Hertenstein & Platt, 1997). The financial measures are the company turnover and the product and product development costs. The nonfinancial measures of design performance are customer satisfaction, creativity, and innovation. Research establishes a relationship between design and strategy that goes beyond the link between design and product. This demonstrates the existence and importance of efficient design management in companies. In conclusion, different companies have different opinions about design, whether they use them or not (Walsh & Roy, 1983). A gap exists between the meaning of design for those companies that use it and the way it is perceived by the nonuser companies. The differences in perception above illustrate the fact that design has an identity problem. Successful implementation of design can only take place if certain core objectives are pursued, such as quality of products or diversification of the product range. The integration of design in companies can be compared to the development of R&D as an integrated function. What does design mean?To companies without a design policyTo companies with a design policyShape or visual appearance100%63%Ergonomics or adaptation of use66%75%Increase in product value (rise in sales or profit)22%63%Efficiency of production or materialsused Fashion and coordination of the24%50%product range17%25%Durability Security of use12%25%7%25% Table 3.1. The Perception of Design Experience (Walsh & Roy, 1983) VIVIEN WALSH, 1986 “The major period of takeoff of R&D [research and development] as a specialized, integrated function in the firm was complementary to the widespread adoption of the highly structured and functionally differentiated M-form. This made the organization of R&D more complicated. Some multidivisional firms have specialized R&D laboratories in each division, while some have a central corporatewide R&D department for the whole enterprise, and others make some kind of hybrid arrangement with elements from both. “This makes the institutionalization of R&D somewhat more complicated but still relatively clear-cut as a specific in-house function compared with design.” Designers are also responsible for some of the opposition design meets in companies. There are often conflicts between designers on how to design; some, for example, want to create products for an ideal world, where all objects are perfectly “designed” and market imperatives and “bad taste” do not exist, which comes across to many as too utopian (Gulmann, 1987). Designers are sometimes tempted to confound the strategic character of certain design projects with the conviction that they can be the strategists of the firm. In order to make the strategy visible, which is the objective of their profession, they need to know the strategy in depth. This often results in the firm going back to a renewed consciousness of its fundamental values. Designers help the firm to conceptualize these values and, therefore, work in the company’s ideation process. But that does not mean they are able to take a leadership role in the company. It is obvious that industry executives will have difficulty choosing their design partners (Anselin, 1998). Though design education is changing to include marketing and strategy courses, most designers are not prepared to work with management. Creative individuals often cultivate an “ego” but, paradoxically, lack confidence and communicate badly. They create multiple barriers between themselves (for example, between graphic, product, and environmental designers who are not of the same professional organization)—barriers that are invisible but very real, so that one form of design rejects another. The fact that there are few reliable professional statistics, as well as a lack of design management courses and research policies with long-term design missions, helps explain the difficulties design has in being implemented into a company. The design profession is still young, with a small library of references, and designers often don’t communicate their methodologies with specificity, thus making working with design somewhat fuzzy. Even though these characteristics have become less and less true, the mentalities remain. Managers need strong reference Table 3.2. Design and Macroeconomic Performance