VisionImprove organizations worldwide through effective management of design for economic growth.MissionBe the international authority, resource, and advocate on design management.Objectives• Assist design managers in becoming leaders in their profession • Sponsor, conduct, and promote research • Collect, organize, and make accessible a body of knowledge · Educate and foster interaction among design managers, organization managers, public policy makers, and academics • Be a public advocate for the economic and cultural importance of design. The Institute envisions a future in which superlative design improves theConstituenciesand managers value design as a crucial business tool. The Institute serves primarily senior design executives and other executives involved in the development of products, communications, and environ- ments. Educators involved in research and teaching in this field also form an important constituency. Finally, DMI strives to improve the general public's understanding of the nature, process, and significance of design.BackgroundDMI was founded in 1975 at the Massachusetts College of Art in Boston by Bill Hannon. In 1986, after building its membership and becoming recog- nized as a leader in the profession through its conferences, DMI became an independent not-for-profit entity. During the following years, it increased its membership by 4oo percent and extended its networks to three conti- nents. In cooperation with Harvard Business School, DMI launched the TRIAD project, the Institute's first international research project in the area of design management. In 1989, the Institute launched the quarterly Design Management Journal, the leading publication in the field. In 199o, the Institute received the prestigious honor of a special award from the Industrial Designers Society of America. DMI's relationship with Harvard Business School has grown even stronger throughout the 199os.Structurethe sole distributor of DMI case studies. The Institute's activities are conducted through a number of programs: Conferences DMI' s conferences, symposia, and professional seminars on strategy, brand, and design management tools form an invaluable educational and networking resource. Senior design executives, policy makers, scholars, (continues) ## Research The research center organizes and conducts programs on issues of concern to designers and senior managers. There is an International Research Forum on Design Management Research & Education. This forum is held every two years in a different location and is hosted by prestigious institutions. Past locations have included: Northeastern University, Boston, 2002; German Design Council, 2000; Pratt Institute, New York, 1998; ESADE Barcelona, 1996; and Paris ESCP EAP, 1994. This academic forum publishes conference proceedings and an academic review. The foreign relations program functions through several networks, which represent one of the Institute’s greatest resources in the United States, Central and Eastern Europe, and Asia, as well as through partnerships, such as the MBA design management distance learning program at Westminster University in England. Design management has a twofold objective: 1. To train partners/managers and designers. This entails familiarizing managers with design and designers with management. 2. To develop methods of integrating design into the corporate environment. ## DR. JURGEN HAUSER Interbrand Koln, 1998 “In essence, design management challenges the most popular misperception of design management—that it is basically a contradiction in terms.” Peter Gorb (1990) defines design management as “the effective deployment by line managers of the design resources available to a company in order to help the company achieve its objectives.” Design management is therefore directly concerned with the place of design within an organization, the identification of specific design disciplines that are relevant to the resolution of key management issues, and the training of senior managers to use design effectively. This definition underscores the point that design is at once an end (putting design in the service of corporate objectives) and a means (contributing to solving management problems). Design management is an “asset management” which builds value, as well as an “attitude management,” which adjusts a company’s state of mind. Alan Topalian (1986) distinguishes between short-term design management, which involves managing a design project, and long-term design management, or management of “global design.” Patrick Hetzel (1993) broadens the scope of design management when he defines it as: / Managing design—that is, managing the creative process within the corporation / Managing a company according to design principles / Managing a design firm Design management involves more than assigning routine administrative tasks; managing human and financial resources and other administrative duties are part of a design manager’s responsibilities but do not exhaust them. The distinguishing feature of design management is its role in identifying and communicating the ways in which design can contribute to a company’s strategic value. DONALD E. PATERSON Former Ford CEO “The key issue in managing the design process is creating the right relationship between design and all other areas of the corporation.” Design management is the implementation of design as a formal program of activity within a corporation by communicating the relevance of design to long-term corporate goals and coordinating design resources at all levels of corporate activity to achieve the objectives of the corporation. Design management’s role is also to foster an understanding of the relevance of design to fulfilling the company’s long-term goals and coordinate design resources at every level of the company. This entails: / Contributing to corporate strategic goals by developing and auditing a design policy, articulating the design policy alongside corporate identity and strategy, and using design to identify needs / Managing design resources / Building a network of information and ideas (a design network and interdisciplinary information resources) (Blaich & Blaich, 1993) Design management is specific to design activity. The only person who can make the brief clear to the staff is the senior design manager or director in his or her day-today interpretations of a design policy. GARY VAN DEURSEN Corporate Director of Industrial Design, The Stanley Works “In the management of design it is critical that the manager be highly skilled in design. It is here that he or she can contribute significantly by critiquing, challenging, and selecting the best solutions. Design management is the deployment of design within a company to help the company develop its strategy. This involves: / Managing the integration of design in the corporate structure at the operational level (the project), the organizational level (the department), and the strategic level (the mission) / Managing the design system within the company. Designers creations are artifacts: documents, environments, products, and services that have their own unique aesthetic qualities. Companies have a formal design system that has to be managed This definition encompasses the dual character of design: / Design is an integral part of company processes and management paradigms. This is the intangible dimension of design / Design is part of the system of societal forms and design paradigms. This is the tangible dimension of design Companies vary greatly in the extent to which they devote resources to design activities and to developing design as a core competency. Design is a valuable asset that deserves to be managed with at least as much skill and care as other business activities (Oakley, 1990). ## TOM PETERS Fall, 1989 “Design is only secondarily about pretty lumpy objects and primarily about a whole approach to doing business, serving customers, and providing value.” Courses in design management are now being developed all over the world, as well as MBA programs that have a specialization in design. For example, at Pratt Institute in New York, the topics covered include: / Marketing professional services, advertising, and strategic marketing / Leadership behavior simulation and negotiation / Business and intellectual property law / Management communication skills / Design operations management / New product management and development / Financial reports and analysis / Financing companies and new ventures / Business strategy and managerial decision making / Business planning and design management case studies ## Professional Profile What is the career path toward becoming a design manager? Anne Haerle, former student of the University of Westminster MBA distance learning program in design management, worked for her dissertation on the question of describing the career path of a designer. She concluded her preliminary research with the creation of a design management career life cycle model in five phases—each requiring different skills and educational requirements (see Table 4.2). In France, another study (Vervaeke, 1999) shows that designers work either in design agencies or the design department of organizations. An in-house designer fulfills a more strategic role in new product development. Designing takes between 41 and 100 percent of the work time of a designer. ## The Convergence of Design and Management Some firms have succeeded in bridging the two worlds of design and management. This augurs well for the possibility of a convergence between these two disciplines. ## A Comparative Approach to Design and Management Differences in the cognitive approaches of designers and managers are often cited as the reason companies find it difficult to integrate design. But are their approaches really so different? The mere juxtaposition of the words “design” and “management” can be difficult, especially to designers who do not see beyond the rational and financial dimensions of management. However, an analysis of the fundamental characteristics and concepts of these two disciplines reveals more similarities than differences (Borja de Mozota, 1998). JOB TITLERESPONSIBILITIESDESIGNERAssociate designer Assistant designer DesignerDeveloping creative solutions to design problemsDESIGN PROJECT MANAGERSenior designer Project mañager Associate design directorCoordinating resources in order to deliver a design within a predetermined schedule and budgetDESIGN STAFF MANAGERCreative director Studio leaderManaging design staff, transferring design strategy into creative briefs, and assembling design teams to meet project needsDESIGN ORGANIZATION MANAGERDirector PrincipalMaking operational and general management decisions that drive the development of a design group or organizationSTRATEGIC DESIGN MANAGERChief design officer Chief executive officerDeveloping the organization's strategic business objective, along with the related design strategies that help meet the goals Table 4.2. The Designer Career Path Table 4.3 compares key concepts of design and management. Clearly, most of the concepts are common to both disciplines. Even the cultural and aesthetic dimensions of design have equivalents in management in the areas of consumer preferences, organizational culture, and corporate identity. Cognitive differences between design and management are thus rooted primarily in the mutual suspicions managers and creative teams have of each other. Because design involves a quest for originality, novelty, creativity, and innovation, it risks finding itself in conflict with classical management styles and conservative attitudes that resist organizational change. As a rule, the rational model of management is based more on control and planning than creativity. The Taylor model, which, according to some executives, lacks “gestalt,” makes it hard to accommodate systemic design activity, but it can acknowledge design as a problem-solving activity aimed at promoting company growth and building competitive advantage through differentiation. More recent management models, however, recognize the importance of intuition for strategy formulation, and provide a framework for a more “artistic”- oriented manager (Mintzberg, 1994). This informal model lends itself well to the design process insofar as it favors a light, simple structure and a focus on key values, and encourages action and experimentation. The manager’s decision-making model thus becomes more intuitive, placing the emphasis on observation and the human dimension, which makes it more appealing to the designer. From the perspective of the informal management model, design and management both represent investigative and experiential decision-making systems with potentially convergent cognitive structures. Since they share common concepts, the domains of design and management might readily become interfaced. However, practical experience demonstrates the complexity of integrating design into the corporate structure. For certain companies, overcoming this difficulty can be turned into an internal competitive advantage. The ability to integrate design becomes a know-how that is difficult for competitors to imitate, in addition to being a core competency. If design and management really do belong to two different cognitive spheres, design management must be viewed as an organizational learning process. DESIGN CONCEPTSMANAGEMENT CONCEPTSDESIGN IS A PROBLEM -SOLVING ACTIVITY.Process. Problem solving.DESIGN IS A CREATIVE ACTIVITY.Management of ideas. Innovation.DESIGN IS A SYSTEMIC ACTIVITY.Business systems. Information.DESIGN IS AN ACTIVITY OF COORDINATION.Communication. Structure.DESIGN IS A CULTURAL AND ARTISTIC ACTIVITY.Consumer preferences. Organizational culture. Identity. Table 4.3. A Comparative Approach to Design and Management Concepts Designers and managers are like any other people: they rely on the decision-making processes that they have depended on in the past, and cling to familiar frames of reference. Managers and designers each have their own ways of seeing and interpreting reality. The cognitive approach of design management accounts for the difficulty in introducing design into the organizational structure. For management, design is unknown information. Further, managers do not readily perceive the need for change; they tend to go with what they know. Finally, managers do not always react in a completely rational manner. ## The “Designence” Model of Design and Management The respective conceptual schemas and paradigms of design and management can serve as a starting point for building a convergent model of the development of design management based on two perspectives: reactive (managerial) and proactive (strategic) (Borja de Mozota, 1992). The managerial approach involves enhancing design by accommodating administrative and management concepts. All management paradigms are examined in order to choose the ideas and methods that will make corporate design more efficient. This can be achieved by linking design with the key concepts of product, brand, identity, and innovation management. This perspective calls for applications of the different theories of management—scientific, behavioral, situational, decisional, and systematic—and an inquiry into their conceptual and practical relevance for the enrichment of design management methods: / Scientific: design management seen as a purely logical process / Behavioral: design management as getting things done by people, centered on relationships, interpersonal group behavior, and cooperation / Decisional: design management as a decision-making activity / Systemic: design management as organizing systems with open interaction with the environment and complex interactive subsystems / Situational: design management depends on circumstances / Operational: design management includes basic managerial activities like planning, organizing, command, control, and departmentalization The strategic approach involves examining design as a new paradigm in order to arrive at ideas and methods that can be used to enhance the efficiency of management in general, and design management in particular. This requires an understanding of the ways in which design perceives reality and an examination of its methods, such as the shape, color, aesthetics, and sociology of objects, in order to enhance management concepts. A different vision of organizational reality emerges from the “science of design”: a management system based on sign and form that is essentially relational and interpretive and which can contribute to enhancing business strategy and the company’s vision. Design management approachThe objective of design managementIts application to quality managementThe managerial approach to design managementEnhance design with managerial methodsContribution of "qualiticians" to designers and design managers• design and organiza- tional performanceData on design's impact on• design/brand, identity, strategy"zero defects'• general management and design management methodsTest of quality perceivedThe strategic approach to design managementImprove management with design knowledgeContribution of designers to "qualiticians”Theories of form; designRethinking processesprinciplesShared vision, continuousCreativity and idea managementimprovement Table 4.4. A Convergent Model for Design and Management: “Designence” Design offers specific tools, such as auditing procedures for strategy formulation, competitive benchmarking, idea management, and models and prototypes for innovation, as well as “boundary-spanning” communication tools. ## Applying the Model: Design and Total Quality Management While design is sy nonymous with quality, quality does not mean the same thing for designers as total quality management. Designers are often unfamiliar with the methodology and techniques of total quality management. Many companies are adopting the total quality approach. Design management can contribute its design competencies to the quest for quality, while enhancing its approach by applying methods derived from this quality certification process. ## Total Quality in the Service of Design Historically, the total quality movement has gone through numerous stages: from the logic of a posteriori inspection of quality, meeting specifications and reducing defects, to the final stage of customer-oriented total quality. Nowadays, quality management is an active principle, and its goal is to make individuals aware of their responsibility in achieving a common objective: to develop a product or service that the customer will perceive as superior. Total quality entails all of the successive scientific advances in the field of quality management for the benefit of the company and its performance. The concept of total quality is a good illustration of the convergence model of design management described above: / Design management is enhanced by management paradigms— design and design management can be measured and improved by total quality methods / Design paradigms are placed in the service of management—design processes optimize total quality, and methods are developed to measure perceived quality, which is then incorporated in total quality management methods We can analyze the contributions of quality management techniques to design management from a scientific, managerial, and human resource perspective. Design already employs some of the scientific techniques of quality management, such as ergonomics, marketing, and value analysis. Design management would benefit from looking at the techniques of quality management to develop design management tools, as well as tools for measuring design effectiveness—such as collecting data on customer satisfaction. The importance of design in the value chain can be evaluated by using quality measurement criteria, such as the impact of design on quality objectives like zero defect, zero inventory, and zero delay, on reducing production defects, and, finally, on the choice of partners and the selection of suppliers. New proactive management methods, which focus on prevention, shared information, cross-disciplinary teams, and network management, are entirely consistent with the way designers work. Design can, therefore, accelerate changes brought about by quality management. Total quality requires an organization to focus on customers and employees (who are also customers). Design introduces a vision of quality that is not quantifiable: the perceived quality of the product or service. We are moving from the notion of measurable quality to the notion of perceived quality. Designers contribute to creating perceived quality. Quality improvement techniques are meaningless without employee participation. Motivation studies, psycho-sociology, group dynamics, and organizational sociology are not part of a designer’s training, yet the knowledge yielded by these disciplines is fast becoming essential for the design manager who wants to produce results. Finally, quality has become a key factor in competitiveness, and this applies to the final product as well as the process. Causal analysis—seeking the causes of a problem until the root is found—is a natural tool in the creative process, as well as a method of process improvement. It may be used to improve the way in which design processes are structured, especially when facing the recurrent problem of design integration. ## Design as a Tool for “Qualiticians” Total quality is often described as a radical new way of thinking, a cultural revolution. It represents a shift in management paradigms that brings quality management closer to the conceptual framework of design. Companies concerned with quality must focus on a number of decision-making processes in which design thinking has already acquired expertise. The achievement of quality requires an ongoing examination of procedures, errors, and defects. By its very nature, the design process tends to challenge routine. Designers like to ask why things are done in a certain way. This aptitude can be deployed proactively as a tool for change within an organization. Quality depends on the will to improve products, as well as the company itself, on a continuous basis. Design is already used as a means of product optimization, but designers can also become active partners in optimizing strategic functions, such as internal communications and human resource management (personnel training and motivation). Design is a horizontal function that can help to create a consensus around quality and inspire a new vision. This process culminates in the incorporation of quality managers into the design department. Example: At Renault, the car manufacturer, quality managers are involved in design and the direction of design has had its quality certification since 1998. The Renault Design Excellence report defines design in terms of quality: “Our mission is to contribute to the constant improvement of product quality, both in terms of its cultural, technical, and industrial components and of customer perception, by putting forward innovative concepts whenever possible and compelling styles.” This mission is associated with process reengineering and aims at quality certification. It is also related to a total quality and continuous improvement approach, which calls for design department managers to be highly involved. The issue of quality brings us back to the problem of the transition from an industrial to a postindustrial economy, and of the dichotomy between the functional and creative aspects of management. The idea of quality relates to the struggle against negative qualities: the specification gaps, defects, and deficiencies that constitute the measurable weaknesses in products or services, and which companies try to minimize using rational tools. However, there is another domain: that of positive qualities that make it possible to overtake competitors and exceed the expectations of potential customers. Some positive qualities can be acquired as a result of constant improvement, and others can be gained through creative innovation and intuition (Bucci, 1998). ## SOHRAB VOSSOUGHI ## President, ZIBA Design, 1998 “Design management is an integration process that gives a company a single voice and conveys a clear message to people inside and outside of the company. Design management requires a delicate balance between art and commerce. To be successful, a design manager must maintain control without limiting creativity. A design manager must reconcile change with consistency. “The greater the penetration of design, the stronger the company. In great companies like Federal Express, Nike, and Microsoft the greatest contribution of design is not visual. The most important contributions of design are: 1. To focus on the human side of business. 2. To create a passion for the power and magic of getting details right. 3. To communicate a positive vision of the future. “To be successful design should be everywhere. Successful designers should contribute to every aspect of corporate activity through creativity, innovation, and passion. “The newest frontier is process design. Designers should look beyond the conventional activities such as packaging, graphics, and product design. Designers have an important role to play in defining how companies use information. How is production information documented and communicated? How are the employees trained? How can the customer experience be simplified and refined?” ## Conclusion / Design management is the planned implementation of design in a company to help the company achieve its objectives. The person in charge of design is the design manager. / Design and management are mutually beneficial: the “designence” model.