# STRATEGIC DESIGN MANAGEMENT A create a relationship between design, strategy, and the identity and cul-ture of the company. The objective is to control the consistency of create a relationship between design, strategy, and the identity and culture of the company. The objective is to control the consistency of design work in the company and to instill design into strategic formulation processes. The design manager, then, becomes a strategy consultant. This role can also be taken on by a design firm that provides the design ideology for the business mission. It is important to elect a long-term design vision and a mind-set that is ecological, technological, humanistic, and dictatorial (Xerox, 2000). At the strategic level, design management has four essential roles (Seidel, 2000): 1. Visualizing the business strategy 2. Searching for core competency 3. Gathering market information 4. Innovating in management processes These roles imply a visual planning of strategy, in which clients and designers become coconspirators (Davenport-Firth, 2000). In practice, strategy is more like a trajectory than a succession of major decisions. Strategic design management methods vary in function according to the configuration of strategy development: 1. “Constructed strategy” through incremental strategic planning, rational personification, politics, or cultural influence 2. “Imposed strategy” through dependence on the external environment or group strategy This final level of design management echoes the strategic process of the company with methods of strategy formulation, selection, and implementation. ## Design Management Strategy Formulation Design management must first participate in the strategy formulation and selection processes by making an effort to bring design knowledge into the transformative vision of the market, but also by supervising the penetration of the design spirit into business objectives. Design management participates in all of the different stages of strategic formulation (Table 11.1). Table 11.1. The Design Management Strategy Process