## Project Design The core of this book is formed by three case studies: the safety bicycle, Bakelite, and the fluorescent lamp. In selecting these cases,I employed two crude criteria. The first was to focus on the actual design process of technology, on the details of the technical machines and processes. The second was to secure an empirical base broad enough to render generalizationsinteresting. The first criterion suggested implicitly what in this study would constitute "technology."The aim was to select cases that would allow a focus on the "hard" contents of technology rather than its systemic aspects. I therefore decided tofocuson“elementary innovations" rather than technological systems, and thisled me to the bicycle rather than the automobile, Bakelite rather than syntheticmaterials in general, andthe fluorescent lamprather than electric lighting. An intuitive and commonsense idea about what "technology" and "society"are, and what there is to be askedabout their developmental process, further informed the selection. However, what starts out as an intuitive assumption about the object of researchof this study will by the endof this book have become akey question: What constitutes"an artifact,"“design,""technical change,""technology,""society"?The object of research will thus, in the course of the book, evolve from elementary technical artifacts to "sociotechnical ensembles." My second criterion was founded on a desire to create a relatively broad empirical base for generalizations. Several dimensions wereused to checkthe heterogeneityof alternative cases: the period inwhich the invention was made, the disciplinary background of the invention, the industrial context, the intended market, and the invention's process or product character. ThusI selectedcases that, takentogether, span most of the periodafter the second industrial revolution: the bicycle covers 1860-1890; Bakelite, 1880-1920; and the fluorescentlamp, 1930-1945. The cases are also varied in terms of their underlying engineering background: mechanical engineering (the bicycle), chemical engineering (Bakelite), and electrical engineering (the fluorescent lamp). Withrespect to industrial context, the cases move from a blacksmith's workshop (bicycle) to an early scientific laboratory (Bakelite) to a large industrial laboratory (fluorescent lamp). The bicycle was exclusively aimed at the consumer market, Bakelite as a molding material was aimed at the industrial market, and thefluorescent lamp has in this respecta hybrid character. In the patentliterature a distinction is often made between productandprocess types of inventions. The bicycle and the fluorescent lamp are clearly both product inventions, while Bakelite is primarily a process invention. Table 1.1 Requirements for a theory of technological development
