## From Detour to Main Route This book is the result of a personal detour that turned into a main route. My detour started from sociopolitical concerns about the role of technology in society and then carried me into academia. Like many Dutch engineering students in the 1970s, I was drawn to the sciencetechnology-society (STS) movement, whose goalwas to enrich the curriculaof both universities andsecondary schools byofferingnew ways to explore issues such as the risks of nuclear energy,the proliferation of nuclear arms and other new weapons systems,and environmental degradation.The movement was eventually quite successful, especially in the natural science and engineering faculties, where small groups were established to teach STS courses and some of the courses even became part of degree requirements. The secondary school science curriculum was also reformed to include STS issues, both optional and integrated into the regular physics program. At the same time, STS students and staff were among the central actors in the movement against the extension of nuclear power and the introductionof the“neutron bomb"and cruise missiles. After gaining access to the academy, however, and during our political struggles, we were increasingly confronted with the crudeness and inadequacy of our models of science and technology development. We were working in many instances on our gut feelings about technology, butwere not able to back our positions with theoretical arguments. This is what spurred my detour into academia—a desire to see if I could help devise new ways to think about the development of technology and its relationship to society. Many other researchers from the early STS ranks made similar detours. Now, two decades later, science and technology studies is a well-established discipline with chairs, journals, societies, and both undergraduate and graduate programs—everything that a respectable academic discipline requires.² But did this detour yield the politically relevant insights that we needed fifteen years ago? Or does our new discipline worry too much about its status in the academy? Have all our activists turned into scholars? The central argument of this book will be that STS can retain its edge even in the academy, that what started out as a detour can be turned into a main route without necessarily losing its societal relevance. At the beginning of my detour I found at least three models open to me. First, there were those who looked down their noses at mere storytellers. These were the scholars, often with backgrounds in the social sciences, who advocated general typologies, precise conceptual definitions, and macrotheoretical schemes that could produce"real"insights and explanations. Second, there were those who poked fun at any theoretical generalization beyond the uniquely detailed story. These students, often of the historians'tribe, scorned the empty theoretical boxesand abstract schemata that did not display any familiarity with what “"really"went on. Third, there were the political activists, who considered any detour into academia a betrayal of the immediate societal tasks that should be the constant overriding concernof critical intellectuals. What finally changed my detour into a main route was the conclusion that all three approaches are equally necessary. I believe that effective societal action on issues of technology and science cannot do without scholarly support, while academic technology studies have much to gain from engagement with politically relevant issues. And only an integration of detailed empirical case studies with general conceptual frameworks can build this link between academia and politics. I have come to believe that an integration of case studies, theoretical generalizations, and political analyses is called for and possible, both to understand the relations between technology and society and to act on issues of sociotechnical change. This book will start with stories, then generate theoretical concepts, and finally argue for politics. The idea of a gap betweenthe real world and academia, at the basis of the"detour"metaphor, proved misleading.
