# CHAPTER VII # THE ENVIRONMENTAL FIELD ## Tri-Dimensional Space and Motion The Interdependence of the Different Aspects of Visual Organization. Tri-dimensional Organization. Retinal Disparity. The Conbınation of the Different "Criteria of Depth." Anisotropy of Space. Perceived Motion. A General Principle of the Theory of Perceived Motion. Stroboscopic and Real Motion. Appaient Velocity. Brown's Experiments. Brown's Results and Korte's Laws. Motion and Time. Selection of Fusion. Conclusions as to the Nature of Bchavioural Things. Summary ## THE INTERDEPENDENCE OF THE DIFFERENT ASPECTS OF VISUAL ORGANIZATION The discussion of the phenomena traditionally treated from the point of view of constancy of shape, size and colour (including transparency) should have demonstrated a general fact of fundamental importance for the understanding of perception: the different aspects of our visual world, size, shape, colour, orientation, and localization, are constituted in a thoroughgoing mutual interdependence. Psychology, when it began to tackle the problem of perception, did not recognize the complexity of its task. It was believed that different aspects of the visual world had different and independent origins which could be studied separately. At first a sense of colour and a sense of space were distinguished, to which later a sense of shape and possibly a sense of motion were added. Such a view errs by translating different problems into different realities. In truth, the colour which a local stimulation produces depends upon the general spatial organization, including size, shape, and orientation, that it calls forth. And this proposition remains true if one exchanges the positions of the different terms. To some extent this interconnectedness has been demonstrated in detail in the preceding discussion. ## TRI-DIMENSIONAL ORGANIZATION But one aspect, the importance of which has transpired in all constancy problems, has not received sufficient treatment. I mean tri-dimensional organization. To attempt a systematic presentation now would be impossible. Not only would it require at least a chapter as long as this, but also, and chiefly, the facts necessary for such a treatment are not yet available, since the great amount of excellent work done in this field was done under assumptions no longer tenable, while comparatively little work has as yet been done from the point of view of organization, though such work will not be long in forthcoming. Therefore in this context I shall take up only a very few points, notably the factor of retinal disparity and the problem of the combination of the so-called depth criteria. Retinal Disparity. That tri-dimensional organization is not in itself the creation of retinal disparity we have emphasized sufficiently. That it plays a very important rôle in producing tri-dimensional organization need hardly be stated. What we shall try to do here is to show that retinal disparity is a factor of organization, depending upon organization. "The traditional treatment of this factor consists in describing the facts without any attempt at going behind them. Corresponding points are defined as points which when simultaneously stimulated give rise to the perception of one object, or as points the stimulation of which gives rise to the perception of one and the same direction. Then the statement is added that if one and the same geographical point is projected on two non-corresponding retinal points it will appear double except when the amount of disparity is small: in that case the point will be seen as one, but either in front or behind the plane of the fixation point, the “nuclear plane," according to the direction of the disparity. I can omit the details, since they can be looked up in most textbooks. Why disparity has these efects is either not stated at all, often because it is assumed to be such an ultimate fact as that stimulation by longwaved light gives rise to the sensation of red, or is treated in such general terms—"utilization of a distance cue by the organism" that the student is in reality no better off than in the first case. Attempt at a Dynamical Theory of Disparity. It is clear that a psychology such as we are trying to develop cannot be satisfied with such a state of affairs. For this psychology the visual world is a product of organization in the psychophysical field, and it attempts to understand the process of this organization and the factors which determine it. The facts of retinal disparity, as usually stated, are facts of geometry. What we require are facts of dynamics. We want to know the forces which result from the geometry of disparity. Two first attempts have been made to discover the nature of these forces, one by Lewin and Sakuma, the other by myself (193o). In the following discussion I shall more or less neglect the difficult, though significant and important, contribution by the first two authors and shall take up some of the points made in my article. THE DEFINITION OF RETINAL CORRESPONDENCE AND DISPARITY. The first point concerns the very definition of correspondence and disparity. At first such a definition seems quite simple: one chooses a certain point in external space and sees on which points of the two retinae it is projected. If then the point is perceived, as one and in the nuclear plane, then the two retinal points on which it is projected are corresponding or identical points; if the point appears double, or not in the nuclear plane, the points are disparate. Exploring the two retinae in this manner, one finds that its two centres are identical and, in a first approximation, also all points which have the same distance in the same direction from the two centres.1 And thus one has reached a purely geometrical or anatomical defnition of corresponding and disparate points, i.e., a purely geometrical method by which to assign to any one point on one retina the corresponding point on the other. And yet it is much more difficult to express the meaning of the co-ordination of two points as corresponding or disparate than it has so far appeared. Supposing I choose the point $\pmb { x _ { 1 } }$ on the left retina and find by the method just indicated the point $\pmb { x _ { \tau } }$ on the right retina which corresponds to it; how can I express the result of this process without using the word "corresponding"? I might say ${ \pmb x } _ { \pmb { \tau } }$ which is as distant in the same direction from the right fovea as $_ { x _ { 1 } }$ is from the left has the property that when it is stimulated by the same external point as ${ \pmb x } _ { \mathbf { b } }$ the owner of the two eyes will see one point in the nuclear plane. The trouble with this proposition is that it uses a point of external space as one of its terms, i.e., something which is external to the proximal stimulus and can therefore have no direct effect upon the process of vision. The eyes "cannot know" whether they are stimulated by the same external point or not; proximal stimulation of certain kinds will produce the perception of one point when in reality there are two (e.g., in the stereoscope), and this perception is as much the effect of correspondence as the seeing of one point when in reality there is only one. We must therefore try to eliminate the distant stimulus from our definition of correspondence and couch it entirely in terms of proximal stimulation. One might try to accomplish this by saying: when two corresponding points are stimulated in the same manner, then the result will be the perception of one point in the nuclear plane. Then equality of stimulation would be required for the definition of correspondence, $\mathbf { i . e . , }$ something which transcends pure geometry. What is true of corresponding points is equally true of disparate ones. To say that ${ \pmb y } _ { \pmb \tau }$ is disparate to $\pmb { x _ { 1 } }$ means that when these two points are equally stimulated the result will not be the perception of one point in the nuclear plane—but either of two points, or of one point not in the nuclear plane. THE DYNAmIcs oF DisPariTY. This definition of correspondence and disparity, though by no means entirely adequate, covers a great many cases provided that “equality" is properly understood. For equality does not mean equality of radiation. Insert into the left half of the stereoscope a grey surface with a blue point on it and into the right an equal surface with a red point, these points being in approximately the same location on their respective surfaces, then one point, of inconstant colour, varying between red and blue, will be seen. This proves that, if we define equality of stimulation by equality of radiation, identical points may be differently stimulated and yet produce the normal result: one perceived point in the nuclear plane. In a second experiment both sides of the stereoscope are white and each has two black points on an imaginary horizontal line which halves these fields, but these points have a different distance from each other on the two sides (see Fig. 8o). In that case $$
