# CHAPTER XIV ## SOCIETY AND PERSONALITY The Incompleteness of the Preceding Discussion. The Main Problcm. The Sociological and the Psychological Group. The Reality of the Sociological Group. The Reality of the Psychological Group. Thc "We." Formulation of the Problem. The Psychological and the Sociological 'Groups Connected by a Circular Process. The Formation of Psychological Groups. The Nature of Psychological Groups. Unification and Segregation. Stability. Articulation. The Results of Group Formation. Products of Civilization. Civilization as a Framework. Personality ## THE INCOMPLETENESS OF THE PRECEDING DISCUSSION Let us suppose that in the preceding chapters we had completely solved all the problems discussed. Should we then possess a full knowledge of behaviour? We need only raise this question to see that we have hardly approached behaviour as it really occurs. For we are members of a society, and our behaviour is dctermined by this fact to a degree which psychologists have only begun to realize. Therefore, without understanding the social factors of behaviour we cannot hope to understand bchaviour. We must know the dynamics of the social factors and the results they produce. The study of a science implies, as we have sccn, the discovery of the laws which govern the phenomena investigatcd and of the conditions under which these laws operate and produce the concrete effects. So far we have neglected that most imiportant set of conditions which we call the social conditions. If we disregard them, then our programme of developing a psychology that can explain the facts of civilization cannot be carricd out. Therefore we devote this last chapter to a brief survey of the main problems of social psychology. This subject is so vast that volumes larger than this can be written about it. Therefore our treatment will have to be sketchy, confining itself in the main to the drawing of outlines without filling them in with material. ## THE MAIN PROBLEM The Sociological and the Psychological Group. An important distinction is necessary for the formulation of our main problem: When we speak of a group—and I shall use this word instead of the more specific one "society" to designate any collections of organisms—we may mean two different things, viz., in our old terminology, a geographical or a behavioural group. I shall in the future call the former the sociological group, since the science of sociology has such groups as its subject matter, and the latter the psychological one. In what sense do these groups exist? The Reality of the Sociological Group. Let us begin with the sociological group, and let us consider one composed of n members. What do we mean when we call these n persons a group? One answer would be that this term is nothing but a convenient name for the n members considered together, but that no reality corresponded to this concept over and above the reality of the members. This answer would, therefore, deny the existence of a group in the strict sense. Now it is surely true that there exists no (n + r)th member, called the group, apart from the n members which compose it. Any group concept that implies, in however subtle a manner, such an interpretation will be rejccted by us at the outset. But is this tantamount to rejecting the reality of à group? Let us remember our treatment of melodies. We saw that and how they are real, and yet the same argument that we just raised against the reality of the group was long ago raised against the reality of melodies: "a melody cannot be real, because if it consists of n tones, there is no (n + 1)th tone." Melodies are behavioural events, and we are now discussing not the reality of the behavioural or psychological, but that of the sociological, group. And therefore it might seem as though we could not apply the melody argument to the group. But this would be a wrong impression, since we know that gestalten are not restricted to the mental or behavioural realm. A group, then, may be a reality even though it need not be a new item added to the number of individuals which compose it. That certain groups are realities we have indicated in a much earlier part of the book (Chapter II, p. 58), where we showed very briefly that certain modes of bchaviour are typical of individuals as members of groups and not of isolated persons. Similarly Bartlett proves the reality of sociological groups by giving detailed descriptions of "reactions which are specific to groups, found in them, and not found outside them" (p. 241). A sociological group, then, has existence, in the sense in which a gestalt has existence, and since the criterion we have used for the reality of the group is at the same time a criterion of its gestalt character, we mnust infer that a group is a gestalt. Such a statement, however, means very little unless we know what kind of a gestalt it is. Two GESTALT CHARACTERISTICS OF SoCIOLOGICAL GROUPs. In this respect groups have a number of very definite characteristics, they are gestalten of a very particular kind. I shall only mention two closely related particularities. In the first place the "strength" of the géstalt may differ over an enormously wide range. The strength of the gestalt character is defined by Köhler by the degree of interdependence of the parts. The stronger the gestalt, the more will each of its parts depend on all the others, and the more will this dependence affect every aspect of the parts. From this point of view practically all of the groups with which we are familiar are relatively weak, but groups in other cultures are much stronger. The difference which Becker calls that of the sacred and the secular society is a good illustration. The stronger the group, the more not only will the behaviour, but the entire status, of its members depend upon their relation to the other members. Thus, in primitive societies, loss of connection with the group may bring about the isolated member's death. To stay nearer home, we may compare the village with the city to exemplify differences in gestalt strength of groups. The strongest groups that we encourter are probably teams in games like football. The fact that groups may have a very low degree of gestalt coherence derives from the second peculiarity that I want to point out. The group is composed of individuals, and the existence of individuals, although largely group-determined, is not exclusively so. To produce children, to rear and educate them, all these are socially determined activities; but much as we may wish to have children of a certain kind, it is not in our power to realize this wish. Again social factors enter to mould the characters of the young independently of our desires, but there remains an'element that is no longer social. And though we cannot measure or evaluate the magnitude of this non-social elemcnt, we have to recognize it. Individuals are differcnt from each other apart from social influences, and since the individuals, by composing the group, determine to some extent its nature, there remains a non-social element in groups. What this means will become clearer when we compare groups with other and stronger gestalten like melodies. In the composer's mind the tones do not exist prior to or independently of the melody. Here the melody, the whole, entirely determines its own members. The fact that the members of groups are not thus completely determined by the group is the same as saying that the group is not of the strongest gestalt type possible. This characteristic becomes especially important the less natural, the more artificial, the groups are. If a number of individuals join to form a club or a society, then the character of the members is already established, and the particular characteristic which such a new group assumes will to a large extent depend upon these characters of its members. The Reality of the Psychological Group. The "We." And now we turn to the behavioural group. In what sense does it exist? Here the answer is easier. The reality of the psychological group finds its expression in the pronoun "we." "We" means not simply a plurality of persons which includes myself, it means in its most proper sense a unified plurality of which I and the others are true members. Otherwise expressed: whcn one says: "We do this," then one means not that the persons included in the “we" are doing this each for himself and independently of the others, but that we do it jointly. The speaker experiences himself as part of a group, and his actions as belonging to this group. Of course, the word “we" can also have the other mcaning. "We have assembled here because we were all born on the same day." The two we's in this sentence are not quite identical. Only the second is a purely summative plural, while the first would carry at least the beginning of a true “group-we." Here the question might be raised whether the “we," when it is used in the non-summative sense, is equivalent to an expression of a psychological group. It seems, at least at first, to be advisable to treat the "we" as more general than the psychological group; for the "we" applies to a great variety of personal relationships not all of which are groups of the same kind. Thus the "we" of bridge players may pertain to all four players or to a pair of partners; similarly a football player might use the word either to designate both teåms or only his own. Similarly, I might say, of Mr. X and me, that we had a discussion on gestalt psychology, and this particular event might be the only one in which I should include him and myself under this term. It is clear that the two partners or the members of a football team form a psychological group of a different kind, if not in a different sense, from that formed by all players. And the group of the last example is entirely of that second kind. In all these cases, however, the word "we" refers to a reality. It is never a mere abbreviation of "they and I," or "he and I." For the I to which it refers is dependent upon the "we." In other words, the plurality to which the word “we" refers is not composed of a number of members which would be dentical in all possible pluralities, but codetermines its own members. I fecl differently, my behavioural Ego is more or less different, when I address a strange audience, when I speak in a dining club of which I am an old member, and when I walk in an academic procession. Details of this relationship will be discussed later; here it only serves to prove the reality of the "we." Formulation of the Problem. Having established the reality of both the sociological and the psychological groups, we can now formulate our main problem: What is the relation between them? In general outline the answer to this question is obvious: a sociological group presupposes a psychological one. For the sociological group differs from a mere collection of individual persons in that the behaviour of'these persons, and the accomplishments to which it gives rise, depend upon the behaviour of tbe other persons. Now the behaviour of another person as a geographical event can influence my bchaviour only in the same way in which any geographical event can influence my behaviour, $\mathbf { i . c . } ,$ by determining my behavioural environment (see Chapter II). This general proposition does not contain any statement about the particular kind of behavioural environment that would account for the formation of sociological groups. But we can see that, although "we-experiences" are not the only ones that contribute to group behaviour, they are a conditio sine qua non for the formation of groups. The mere presence in my behavioural field of other human beings will not lead to social behaviour. If a person or a group of persons is in my way, I shall make a detour in order to get what İ want, just as I would if an inanimate object obstructed my path. My behaviour might be as little social in the first case as in the second. Such arguments may cven seem pedantic in view of the fact that we experience a “we," a belonging to a psychological group; therefore it seems natural to connect the geographical, or sociölogical, groups with the psychological ones. Granted then that sociological groups arise through the mediation of psychological ones, the concrete nature of this dynamic connection becomes a problem, which again must first be stated in broad outline. Given a sociological group g composed of $\pmb { n }$ members, it must owe its origin to the existence and interaction of n psychological groups $\mathbf { G } _ { \mathbf { n } } ,$ and the interaction of these $\mathbf { G } _ { \mathbf { n } }$ becomes the fundamental problem. How do events within behavioural fields, the $\mathbf { G } _ { \mathbf { a } } ,$ lead to the establishment of a geographical reality, the ${ \bf g } \Rsh$ The Psychological and the Sociological Groups Connected by a Circular Process. We have in various places discussed similar problems on a simpler level (see Chapter VII, pp. 311 f., and Chapter $\mathbf { I X } ,$ pp. 373 f.). Thus we saw in our discussion of movement how behavioural events gave rise to geographical ones by a circular process. If we apply this principle to our present problem we find the following situation: in the field of k, who is a member of the n who form the group, there exists a psychological group, a "we," and this part of the field is, for some reason or other, under stress. Then movement, behaviour, will be started in such a way that it leads to,a new field which is under less stress than the original field. Although this general statement is obviously true, it is far too vague to characterize the ensuing behaviour sufficiently. What more can we then say about it? K's behaviour will affect the fields of the other persons in the group, a—j and 1—n, changing the stresses of their behavioural fields and thereby leading them to act. Their action similarly will change k's field. It was the function of k's action to reduce the pressure in his own field. Therefore his action will fulfil this function only if the actions of a—j and l—n, to which it givcs rise, lead to such a reduction of stress in k's field. The relation between the action arising from stress in a field and the result of this action on the stress of the field is therefore much more indirect than in the case of the eye-movements, mediated by other fields and their stresses. But for all this difference there remains a fundamental similarity: no new law is needed, only the application of the old law to a vastly more complex set of conditions. Of course all members of the group have an equal right to be considered as k; i.e., in group behaviour we have an interplay, mediated by action, of n different behavioural fields, which may, and often does, produce organized behaviour, organized as well in each individual person as in the whole, sociological, group. Our principle explains, indeed, true sociological behaviour by deriving it from psychological behaviour; g has been explained by the interaction of the Gn. I am prepared to assert that the problem of social psychology con-. sists in filling in this general framc. In the rest of this chapter I shall discuss only a few points withın this frame. They will fall under the following headings: (1) How do psychological groups become organized?"(2) What are their main characteristics? (3) What are the results of social activity and how do they influence such activity? As we have seen so often during the course of this book, different problems distinguished in a certain field are in reality interdependent. The same is true of the last three questions, none of which can be answered entirely without reference to the others. ## THE FORMATION OF PSYCHOLOGICAL GROUPS Nevertheless, we can start with the first problem and inquire into the formation of psychological groups. These groups, being parts of behavioural fields, must arise through proccsses of field organization. They are different from such group organizations as we have previously studied (point groups, line groups, etc.) in the fact that they include the Ego. Although this fact need not deter us from trying to apply our laws of organization to such instances, since we have met with a sufficient number of occasions in which the Ego is to be treated like othe: field objects, it is of extreme significance for the Ego. The Ego, being part of a group, will have characteristics due to this membership, a topic which we shall 'take up in thc context of our third problem. Now we must try to discover forces which are responsible for behavioural group-formation. The Law of Similarity. We begin with an extremely simple case, not because it is the most significant or typical one, but because it will clarify the problem in the casiest way. When we enter a room, we see the pcople in it as a group, scparate from all the other objects, and more or less independent of their spatial distribution. This organization is, at least in part, reducible to the law of equality or similarity; thus far it offers no new problem. And as long as the matter remains there, this group formation is not the one we are now interested in. At first, on entcring the room, we do not belong to the group. A little later, however, we may. What has produced this new group, containing not only the other people but also ourselves? Does it seem far-fetchcd to apply the same lw to the formation of this new group which was found operative in the formation of the first? I believe not. 'Though surely not the only fartor, the similarity between ourselves and the others seems definitely to contribute to this new organization. Thus one feels distinctly out of place when one is in evening dress while none of the others are, even when no social mistake is involved on either side. Similarity and Physiognomic Characters. I will admit, however, that the factor of equality is not the strongest force in group formations. But it will leād us directly to other and more important ones as soon as we begin to analyze the cquality or similarity itself. Why is my Ego, which is given only to a small extent in visual terms, similar to other persons, who are predominantly given in such terms? The answer must be that my Ègo must be similar to other persons with respect to characters which, though they may be carried by visual characteristics, need not be so carried. We have encountered these characters before (Chapter VIII, pp. 359 f., and Chapter IX, p. 407), when we called them physiognomic characters. We saw that through these characters particularly strong Ego-object forces are aroused; therefore it is not a new step when we now connect group formation in general, and similarity in particular, with them. For something that we know as characteristics of our Ego appears also in those parts of the field which we call human beings, and to a lesser degree in animals. We perceive, through vision and audition, persons, i.e., objects endowed with the same kind of spontaneity that we possess, with purpose and hesitation, with joy and sadness, courāge, ambition, and so on; and we experience ourselves also as persons. If, then, equality is an active factor in group formation, it must be equality of physiognomic character. Thus a sophisticated person will fall in easily with other sophisticated or even blasé oncs, and will readily develop in his field a psychological group to which they and he belong; conversely, a direct and simple person will not easily find himself a part of a “we" if he is thrown in with a number of sophisticated people. Similarly, to be sad tends to exclude one from à gay group. That physiognomic similarity can lead to group formation is evidenced by certain mixed swarms of birds composed of different species with different life habits. Stresemann (quoted by Katz, 1926, p. 466) believes that he has found the causes of this group formation. "The little birds which come into proximity to an impressive and usually noisy swarm are attracted by it; they hurl themselves into the living maelstrom and are not easily able to extricate themselves from it." The Origin of Physiognomic Characters. How We Perceive "The Other Person's Mind." But the dynamic characters play a far greater rôle than that of merely determining the boundaries of psychological groups; they are also largely responsible for the group structure and group behaviour. Therefore our next step must be to answer the question raised in Chapter IX (p. 407), how persons as behavioural objects possess physiognomic charactcrs, or, more popularly expressed, how we perccive the other person's mind. I can confine myself to a brief treatment, since Kohler has discussed this problem very fully in the seventh chapter of his "Gestalt Psychology." I forbear to refute the two most widely held theories according to which we understand the other person's emotions by an inference based on analogy or by association. Both theories have been amply disproved by Kohler and C. D. Broad. The latter author thercfore concludes: "Hence only two alternatives seem to be left. Either (1) there are certain cognitive situations which actually contain other minds or certain of their states as objective constituents; or (2) the visual appearance of certain bodily forms, movements, gestures, and modifications, has for us an unacquired meaning" (p. 327). It is interesting to see how Broad deals with these two possibilities. Although he gives dominance to the second, he is disinclined to reject the first completely. But the first is even less acceptable than the two rejected traditional thcories, because it implies a theory of perception which to me at least appears mystical. For it would' negate the difference between a behavioural and a geographical world. If somebody else's mind could be given to me directly, it would be simultaneously and identically the same object in my behavioural and in the geographical world. The second possibility, onethe other hand, is another way of acknowledging thc existence of physiognomic characters. Therefore everything depends upon the elaboration of this second possibility, i.e, on the answer to the question how persons as behavioural objects can possess physiognomic characters, physiagnomic characters moreover which have cognitive value, which coincide with essential aspects of the other person as a geographical object. Broad's answer is this: "We must suppose that the innate constitution of human beings (and probably of other gregarious animals) is such that, when one sees any body which in fact resembles his own closely enough, he instinctively believes it to be animated by a mind like his own" (p. 33o). T'his, of course, is highly unsatisfactory. It is not true that one believes the other body to be animated by a mind like one's own. Kohler has stressed this point: ". . . sometimes I understand others as being highly different from me. The characteristic manliness of Douglas Fairbanks is something which impresses me very much, thougb, unfortunatcly, I shall never be able to achieve it myself" (1929, p. 237). But apart from this inadequacy Broad's explanation is no explanation in à true sense. All it does is to invoke man's innate constitution, his instincts. This explanation is of the type of the famous vis dormitiva, and therefore resolves itself into a renaming of the problem which it pretends to solve. If we take it seriously, we have to apply it to concrete cases. How does it deal with questions like these: Why does this face appear to me sad, that gesture resigned, this voice exultant? Have we for each such experience a special kind of constitution, a separate instinct? And how does each special occasion contrive to appeal to a particular part of the constitution or to arouse a special instinctive faculty? Since a theory like Broad's must leave all such questions unanswered, it gives no real solution of the problem. How, then, can forms, movements, gestures, have an unacquired meaning? This question does not strike us as particularly new or startling, for we have encountered a number of properties which behavioural objects possess directly (apart from the sense qualities). A line may be curved or broken, à figure symmetrical or out of shape, a tone in a melody flat or sharp, to name only a few instances. Behavioural objects possess these properties because of the organizations to which they owe their existence. We have also, in a special discussion, added the physiognomic characters to the list of such properties of behavioural objects, indicating that for them it is as a rule more difficult to point out the details of the underlying organization. Yet it is possible to produce clumsy or graceful objects in anybody's behavioural world without confronting him with other persons. A good draughtsman can produce graceful lines, clumsy figures, gay and melancholy patterns. This is still easier when we employ temporal arts. Indeed, very few objects of our behavioural worlds are so charged with emotion as good music is. Another example would be puppets, puppets which need to bear very little geometrical resemblance to human beings and yet arc capable of carrying a wealth of emotional characters. The best examples for our argument are perhaps certain trick films after the pattern of Mickey Mouse, for here there is objectively neither motion nor emotion, but a mere sequence of strange drawings. But this sequence gives rise to objects in the behavioural world of the observers which move, and are agile or clumsy, exuberant or dejected, and so forth. The merit of this example lies in the fact that here all these characters are only in the behavioural objects and entirely absent in the geographical ones. The “meanings" which those forms and motions possess for us are therefore most clearly aspects or results of the psychophysical organizations produced by the stimuli. But why are these “meanings" physiognomic, why do they convey emotions or other mental characteristics? This is a good question, if it is intended to signify only why objects have physiognomic characters, like sad and gay, and so forth. But it becomes at once misleading if it stresses the word "mental" or opposes it to "bodily" or physical. For many, if not most, words which we apply to subjective experience are equally well used for objective experience. Köhler, from whom this argument is taken, adduces a number of examples borrowed from Klages: “a bitter feeling," "a soft mood," "sweet love," etc. Therefore, what we have,to explain is not the mental nature of these properties, but their ¿uality. Why bitter and not sweet, calm and not excited, black and not bright! In order to solve this problem we turn to a different class of cases, those where the physiognomic character is, more or less, veridical. I see an irritable person, and the person really is irritable; I meet my friend in the morning and find him depressed, although he tries to conceal it; I am shocked by the meanness of that face, and in truth a mean soul dwells behind that ugly mask. Such cases will lead us further, because here the geographical object possesses certain characteristics which are due to its intrinsic nature and which in some way or other become operative in proximal stimulation. Thus the movements of an irritated or a depressed person will be causally connected with his state of mind, and will on the other hand provide proximal stimuli for other persons who obscrve him. Thus a situation arises with two main relations: let us call the irritated or depressed person A, his fricnd who observes him B. Then the first relation is inherent in A, viz., that between his mood and his movements; and the second between these movements as possible stimuli for B and B's perception of A and his mood. That the mood or emotion of A influences A's actions is obvious. Action springs from stresses within Ego systems, and emotions bear, as we have explained in Chapter IX, a close relation to these Ego stresses. Even so, the dynamic relation between the two might be of different kinds. Emotion might cause or influence action by mere release; in this case the form of action would be independent of the emotion which released these actions, depending only on the “motor-mechanisms" thus brought into play. But all along in our discussion of action we have found the concept of release quite inadequate to deal with the facts; everywhere we found actions not only rcleased, but also guided or steered by forces residing in the total field. Therefore we shall have to consider this possibility in our present problem. If an emotional stress steers action, then the ensuihg movements will, to some extent, mirror the emotions; characteristics of overt behaviour will map characteristics of the field in which this behaviour is started. The slow dragging movements of the depressed, the jerky, discontinuous movements of the irritable, correspond indeed to the leaden state of depression or the disrupted state of irritability. The one, viz., the overt side, is as much depression or irritability as the other, the conscious side. Therefore it is meaningful to say that real behaviour, as defined in Chapter II (pp. 39 f.), is emotional. And now we turn to our second relation, that between A's overt behaviour and B's perception of A. On B's sense organs, notably his eyes and ears, there is a proximal stimulation, determined by the shape and the actions of A. This stimulation gives rise to the spatiotemporal organization of A in B's behavioural field. It maps $\mathbf { B ^ { \prime } s }$ $\pmb { \triangle } \mathbf { \ ' } _ { \pmb { \triangle } }$ movements on B's retinae, his speech on his ear drums. Our total $\mathbf { B ^ { \prime } s }$ situation now looks like this: $$
