## Celtic book design The period from the collapse of Rome until the eighth century was a time of migration and upheaval throughout Europe, as different ethnic groups fought for territory. These unsettled times were the darkest decades of the medieval era. However, wandering hordes of Germanic Barbarians did not invade the island of Ireland, tucked in the far corner of Europe, and the Celts living there enjoyed relative isolation and peace. In the early fifth centuryCE, the legendary Saint Patrick and other missionaries began to rapidly convert the Celts to Christianity. In a fascinating melding of culture and religion, pagan temples were converted to churches, and Celtic ornaments were applied to chalices and bells brought to Ireland by the missionaries. Celtic design is abstract and extremely complex; geometric linear patterns weave, twist, and fill a space with thick visual textures, and bright, pure colors are used in close juxtaposition. This Celtic craft tradition of intricate, highly abstract decorative patterns was applied to book design in the monastic scriptoria, and a new concept and image of the book emerged. A series of manuscripts containing the four narratives of the life of Christ are the summit of Celtic book design. Written and designed around 680CE, the Book of Durrow (or Durmachensis) is the earliest fully designed and ornamented Celtic book. The Book of Durrow was first assumed to have been created in Ireland. However, it is now thought to have come from the British Isles, but to have been written and decorated by Irish scribes. The Lindisfarne Gospels (also known as the Book of Lindisfarne or Lindisfarnensis), written by Eadfrith, bishop of Lindisfarne, before 698CE, represents the full flowering of the Celtic style. The masterwork of the epoch is the Book of Kells, created at the island monastery of Iona around 800CE. Countless hours of work were lavished upon individual pages, whose vibrant color and form are in distinct contrast to the stark, reclusive environment and rule of silence found in the monastic scriptorium. Ornament was used in three ways: ornamental frames or borders were created to enclose full-page illustrations (Fig. 4-4); opening pages of each gospel and other important passages were singled out for illumination, particularly by the design of ornate initials (Fig. 4-5); and full pages of decorative design called carpet pages were bound into the manuscript. This name developed because the densely packed design had the intricate patterning associated with oriental carpets. As a carpet page from the Lindisfarne Gospels shows (Fig. 4-6), a seventh-century Celtic cross or other geometric motif became an organizing form that brought structure to the interlaces and lacertines filling the space. The interlace was a two-dimensional decoration formed by a number of ribbons or straps woven into a complex, usually symmetrical design. It is evident that drafting instruments were used to construct many of the designs in Celtic manuscripts. Interlaces created by animal forms were called lacertines. Most of the forms were either invented from imagination or based on earlier models. Careful observation of nature was not required of the Celtic designer or 