## The further development of the German illustrated book While graphic artists and printers in Italy and France evolved toward Renaissance book design (discussed in chapter 7), German graphic artists continued their tradition of using textura typography and vigorous woodcut illustrations. One of Dürer’s former students, Hans Schäufelein, was commissioned to design the illustrations for Melchior Pfintzing’s Teuerdank (Fig. 6-22), an adventure of chivalry and knighthood printed by Johann Schoensperger the Elder at Nuremberg in 1517. Commissioned and planned by Emperor Maximilian I (1459-1519)—archduke of Austria, German king, and Holy Roman emperor (1493-1519)—to commemorate his marriage to Mary of Burgundy, this lavish book required five years to produce. The types for Teuerdank, designed by court calligrapher Vincenz Rockner, comprise one of the earliest examples of the Gothic style known as Fraktur. Some of the rigid, angular straight lines found in textura letterforms were replaced with flowing, curved strokes. Rockner carried this design quality even further in an effort to duplicate the gestural freedom of the pen. As many as eight alternate characters were designed and cast for each letterform. These had sweeping calligraphic flourishes, some of which flowed deep into the surrounding space. When the book was published, other printers insisted that these ornamental letterforms must have been printed from woodblocks, refusing to believe it possible to achieve these effects with cast metal types. (An inverted i in the 1517 edition, however, conclusively proves that metal types were used to print Teuerdank.) Technically speaking, a broadside is a single leaf of paper printed on one side only. When both sides are printed, the page is frequently called a broadsheet; however, these terms are often used interchangeably. This ephemeral form of graphic communications became a major means for information dissemination from the invention of printing until the middle of the nineteenth century. Content ranged from announcements of deformed births to portraits of famous secular and religious leaders (Figs. 6-26 and 6-27). Festivals and fairs were advertised, and the sale of lottery tickets and indulgences was announced. Political causes and religious beliefs were expounded, and invasions and disasters were proclaimed. Folded printed sheets evolved into pamphlets, tracts, and, later, newspapers. The design of a broadside was often the task of the compositor, who organized the space and made typographic decisions while setting the type. Woodblock illustrations were commissioned from artists. Once available, a given woodblock might appear in a number of broadsides, or be sold or loaned to another printer. As Martin Luther pressed the breach with the Catholic Church that began in 1517, his presence at the university in Wittenberg brought importance to the graphics produced there. Luther found a loyal friend and follower in the artist Lucas Cranach the Elder (1472-1553), who had been called to Wittenberg by the electors of Saxony. In addition to his studio, staffed by a number of well-trained assistants, Cranach operated a printing office, a bookshop, and a paper mill. He even found time to serve as mayor of Wittenberg twice. He turned his considerable energy to the Reformation by portraying the Reformers and their cause in books and broadsides. When Luther traveled to Worms for his celebrated trial in 1521, his portraits by Cranach filled the town on printed matter proclaiming his beliefs. Yet Cranach regularly accepted commissions for Madonnas and Crucifixions from Catholic clients, and many of the woodcuts he produced for the Luther Bible were also used in a subsequent Catholic edition. A most effective example of propaganda is Cranach’s work for the Passional Christi und Antichristi (Passion of Christ and Antichrist) (Figs. 6-23 and 6-24), printed by Johannes Grunenberg in 1521. Inspired by Luther, scenes from the life of Christ and biting depictions of the papacy are juxtaposed in graphic contrast on facing pages. Both of Cranach’s sons, Hans Cranach (d. 1537) and Lucas Cranach the Younger (1515-86), joined their father’s studio; few examples of Hans’s work remain, but the younger son continued to work in the family style for many years after his father’s death and illustrated books such as Fabian von Auerswald’s Ringer-Kunst (Art of Wrestling) (Fig. 6-25) and the broadside displaying Martin Luther’s portrait (Fig. 6-26). In addition to Cranach, Hans Baldung Grien (c. 1480-1545), also a supporter of the Reformation, produced portraits of Luther (Fig. 6-27). 