## Defining the medium During the same decades, when inventors were expanding photography’s technical boundaries, artists and adventurers were exploring its image-making potential. Photography accurately reflects the external world, yielding a precise and repeatable image. However, merely isolating a single moment in time was not enough for some nineteenth-century photographers; they defined and extended the aesthetic and communicative frontiers of the new medium. An early effort to introduce design concerns into photography began in May 1843, when the Scottish painter David Octavius Hill (1802-70) decided to immortalize the 474 ministers who withdrew their congregations from the Presbyterian Church and formed the Free Church of Scotland. Hill teamed up with Edinburgh photographer Robert Adamson (1821-48), who had been making calotypes for about a year. Using forty-second exposures, Hill posed the subjects in sunlight using all the knowledge gained in two decades of portraiture (Fig. 9-39). The resulting calotypes were lauded as superior to Rembrandt’s paintings. Hill and Adamson also created landscape photographs that echoed the visual order found in landscape paintings of the period. When Julia Margaret Cameron (1815-79) received a camera and the equipment for processing collodion wet plates as a forty-ninth birthday present from her daughter and son-in-law, the accompanying note said, “It may amuse you, Mother, to photograph.” From 1864 until 1874, this wife of a high British civil servant extended the artistic potential of photography through portraiture that recorded “faithfully the greatness of the inner man as well as the features of the outer man” (Fig. 9-40). A lively contribution to photography was made by the Frenchman F. T. Nadar (1820-1910). His portraits of writers, actors (Fig. 9-41), and artists have a direct and dignified simplicity and provide an invaluable historical record. In 1886 the first photographic interview was published in Le journal illustré (Fig. 9-42). Nadar’s son Paul made a series of twenty-one photographs as Nadar interviewed the eminent hundred-year-old scientist Michel Eugène Chevreul. The elderly man’s expressive gestures accompanied his answers to Nadar’s questions. 