## Art nouveau A direct corollary of the Arts and Crafts movement, art nouveau was an international decorative style that thrived during roughly the two decades (c. 1890-1910) that girded the turn of the century. It encompassed all the design arts—architecture, furniture and product design, fashion, and graphics—and consequently embraced posters, packages, and advertisements; teapots, dishes, and spoons; chairs, door frames, and staircases; factories, subway entrances, and houses. Art nouveau’s identifying visual quality is an organic, plantlike line. Freed from roots and gravity, it can either undulate with whiplash energy or flow with elegant grace as it defines, modulates, and decorates a given space. Vine tendrils, flowers (such as the rose and lily), birds (particularly peacocks), and the human female form were frequent motifs from which this fluid line was adapted. The term art nouveau arose in a Paris gallery run by art dealer Samuel Bing, which opened in 1895 as the Salon de l’Art Nouveau. In addition to Japanese art, “new art” by European and American artists was displayed and sold there. This gallery became an international meeting place where many young artists were introduced, among them the American glass artist Louis Comfort Tiffany, whose work had a sizable influence in Europe. Nikolaus Pevsner’s Pioneers of Modern Design, which first appeared in 1936, was one of the first books to give art nouveau a significant position in the development of twentieth-century art and architecture. Pevsner saw the movement’s principal characteristics as “the long sensitive curve, reminiscent of the lily’s stem, an insect’s feeler, the filament of a blossom or occasionally a slender flame, the curve undulating, flowing and interplaying with others, sprouting from corners and covering asymmetrically all available surfaces.” To dismiss art nouveau as surface decoration is to ignore its pivotal role in the evolution of all aspects of design. Art nouveau is a transitional style that evolved from the historicism that dominated design for most of the nineteenth century. By replacing this almost servile use of past forms and styles and rejecting the anachronistic approaches of the nineteenth century, art nouveau became the initial phase of the modern movement, preparing the way for the twentieth century. This was a vital period in architecture and the applied arts, because it formed a bridge between Victorian clutter and modernism. The Victorians sought solutions through established historical approaches, while the modernists adopted a new international ornamental style, using elegant motifs aligned with nature and often distinguished by free and graceful lines. Although expressions of this new style varied from country to country, they were all part of the same family. Ideas, processes, and forms in twentieth-century art bear witness to this catalytic function. Modern architecture, graphic and industrial design, surrealism, and abstract art have roots in art nouveau’s underlying theory and concepts. In art nouveau graphics, the organic linear movements frequently dominate the spatial area and other visual properties, such as color and texture. In earlier three-dimensional design, ornaments often were mere decorative elements applied to the surface of a building or object, but in art nouveau objects, the basic forms and shapes were formed by, and evolved with, the design of the ornament. This was a new design principle unifying decoration, structure, and intended function. Because art nouveau forms and lines were often invented rather than copied from nature or the past, there was a revitalization of the design process that pointed toward abstract art. Perhaps the seminal genius of the movement was Belgian architect Baron Victor Horta (1861-1947). His 1892 townhouse for Emile Tassel was unified by tendrilous curvilinear networks unlike anything yet seen in England or on the Continent. During this period there was a close collaboration between visual artists and writers. The French symbolist movement in literature of the 1880s and 1890s, with its rejection of realism in favor of the metaphysical and sensuous, was an important influence and led artists to symbolic and philosophic attitudes. In a skeptical era with scientific rationalism on the rise and traditional religious beliefs and social norms under assault, art was seen as a potential vehicle to a much-needed spiritual rejuvenation. Birth, life, and growth; death and decay— these became symbolic subject matter. The complexity of this era and movement has allowed contradictory interpretations: because of its decorativeness, some observers see art nouveau as an expression of late nineteenth-century decadence; others, however, noting art nouveau’s quest for spiritual and aesthetic values, see it as a reaction against the retrogression and materialism of this epoch. Art nouveau graphic designers and illustrators attempted to make art a part of everyday life. Their fine-arts training had educated them about art forms and methods developed primarily for aesthetic considerations. At the same time they enthusiastically embraced applied-art techniques that had evolved with the development of commercial printing processes. As a result, they were able to upgrade significantly the visual quality of mass communications. The international character of art nouveau was expedited by advances in transportation and communications technology. Contact between artists in various nations through print media and international exhibitions allowed cross-fertilization to take place. The many art periodicals of the 1890s served this purpose while simultaneously introducing the new art and design to a larger audience. The sources often cited for art nouveau are diffuse and wide-ranging. They include William Blake’s book illustration, Celtic ornament, the rococo style, the Arts and Crafts movement, Pre-Raphaelite painting, Japanese decorative design, and especially ukiyo-e woodblock prints. Important inspiration also came from European painting in the late 1880s, which had fallen under the Asian spell. The swirling forms of Vincent Van Gogh (1853-90), the flat color and stylized organic contour of Paul Gauguin (1848-1903), and the work of the Nabis group of young artists all played a role. The Nabis explored symbolic color and decorative patterns, concluding that a painting was, first of all, an arrangement of color in two-dimensional patterns. 