## Pentagram, the formative years The historical influence of the United Kingdom, a constitutional democracy uniting England, Northern Ireland, Scotland, and Wales, has transcended its size. Under Queen Elizabeth I (1533-1603), England became a major naval power and started its vast colonial empire, spreading English social customs and language around the globe. This international influence continues today. In post–World War II England, graphic design was characterized by an international culture that embraced the fine and performing arts. Both the purist modernism of Switzerland and the graphic expressionism of New York were assimilated, but outstanding English designers succeeded in making significant contributions to international dialogue while avoiding becoming tied to those movements that influenced them. After the trauma of the war, Herbert Spencer (1922-2002) became an important voice in renewing British graphic design through his writing, teaching, and graphic design practice. Spencer’s understanding of modern art and design was translated into a rare typographic sensitivity and structural vitality. As editor and designer of the journal Typographica and author of Pioneers of Modern Typography, an influential 1969 book that informed the postwar generation about the accomplishments of earlier twentieth-century designers, Spencer helped stimulate the worldwide dialogue. A design partnership that formed in 1962 became an early locus of British design. Alan Fletcher (1931-2006), Colin Forbes (b. 1928), and Bob Gill (b. 1931) launched a studio that carried their names. In 1965, after Gill left the partnership and architect Theo Crosby (1925-94) joined the firm, the name was changed to Crosby, Fletcher, Forbes. Exhibition design, historic conservation, and industrial design were added to the firm’s activities. As additional partners were added, the name of the studio was changed to Pentagram. Continued growth would make this five-pronged name obsolete, for by 1996 Pentagram had seventeen partners and 148 employees in its offices in London, Hong Kong, New York, San Francisco, and Austin, Texas. Intelligence and a talent for developing design solutions suited to the needs of the problem were the hallmarks of Pentagram design during its formative years in London. Asked to design a cover for a magazine containing an article about their work, the designers mailed a parcel from London to Zurich with a request for its return unopened. A color photograph documenting its journey through the postal system became the cover design (Fig. 23-1). British wit and a willingness to try the unexpected were combined with a thorough evaluation of the communications problem and the specific nature of the environmental conditions under which the design was to appear. This summarizes the essence of the Pentagram approach to graphic design. In the best English tradition, Pentagram’s partners combined a sense of the contemporary (Figs. 23-2 and 23-3) with a strong understanding of history. The firm’s earlier design solutions range from clean geometric forms in corporate identity systems to a warm historicism in packaging design and graphics for smaller clients. Conceptual, visual, and often imbued with expressive humor, Pentagram’s graphic design work enabled Britain to establish an international presence in the field just as it had at the turn of the twentieth century and in the years after World War I. Pentagram’s expansion into other countries and continents is a testament to the organizational skills and creativity of the original partners. 