## A NEW TYPEFACE why do we need a new typeface? this question is justified. with the replacement of hot metal printing by photosetting the number of typefaces has increased by leaps and bounds. it is an easy matter to put any number of typefaces into a data base and then expose the individual letters on photographic paper or film. and photographic or film material is sufficient for most printing processes today. so why increase this typeface inflation by yet another face? typeface asceticism, limitation of diversity should be what is demanded. on the other hand typefaces can also be seen from the point of view of whether the development of type is finished, has come to a standstill today. whether one should, as is said in architecture, withdraw to quotations. typefaces can be seen from the point of view of their use, the optimization of their reading quality, instead of, as usually happens today, that of their formal quality, their aesthetic satisfaction. if one thinks like this and gives priority to the quality of use it is certainly easy to come to the conclusion that most modern faces are nonsensical because they are not suitable for printing a novel. it would be too difficult to read, one would be too quick to put the book down. and at the same time you would come to the conclusion that even good typefaces cannot be the last word. their quality is not adequate any more. to find that out one needs a precise definition of the assessment criteria. faces have to be analysed, they have to be tested in use. the belief is long past that typefaces are good if they are built up on formal basic elements like circle, square or triangle. that was the way the bauhaus thought, and this basic principle is still dominant in renner's “futura”. all one has to do is make the attempt to reshape one's own handwriting on this principle. and handwriting, as a used script, is still an outstanding testbed for finding out what makes typefaces good or bad. it is a good idea to abandon any formal code if one wants to test what a typeface is worth. one should not overtax the old masters either. people of the calibre of claude garamond or giambattista bodoni were not concerned with optimizing legibility, simply because that was not a question at the time. they unquestioningly possessed a feeling for a manageable face, they did not think much of analytical criteria. at that time people read folios, not paperbacks. e
