## ACTION Adjusted Behaviour, Attitudes, Emotions, and the Will The Task of This Chapter. The Problem of Adjusted Behaviour. How the Behavioural Environment Directs Behaviour. The Circular Process. The “Adcquacy" of the Behavioural World. Cognitive Value of Manifest Organization. Manifest Organization in Phenomenal Bchaviour. Its Cognitive Value. Insight. Silent Ego-organization. The Special Problems of Localization with Moving Eyes. Directed Action. The Force Diagrams. Variability of the Dynamic Characters. Thc Functional Characters of Behavioural Objects. Attitudes and Their Effects on the Behavioural Environment. Emotions. Silent and Manifest Organization. The Dynamic Theory of Emotion. Experimental Evidence. The Will. McDougall's Hormic Theory. Lewin's Concepts. Conclusion and Outlook ## THE TASK OF THIS CHAPTER In the last chapter we have taken up points (3) and (4) of our programme formulated in the second chapter (p. 67). We have studied the Ego and we have demonstrated the forces which connect the Ego with its environmental field. Both studies have to be continued. With regard to point (3) we must discuss the place of emotion and sentiment in the Ego, which so far has been mentioned rather incidentally, and with regard to point (4) we have to discuss the Ego-field relationships in greater detail, particularly the steady transformation which the field undergoes under the influence of the Ego, its needs and quasi-needs, its desires, wishes, resolves and attitudes. Lastly, we must add a discussion of our fifth and last point, the relation of behaviour to the geographical environment, the cognitive or adjustive aspect of behaviour. ## THE PROBLEM OF ADJUSTED BEHAVIOUR We shall begin our discussion with this last problem. In our theory behaviour was determined by the properties of the total psychophysical field, i.e., by the dynamic structure of the Ego and that of its psychophysical environment. Why is $\mathbf { i t } ,$ at the same time, adapted behaviour? Why does behaviour, leading to ever new stabilizations within the psychophysical field of the organism, also fulfil the task of preserving the real organism in its geographical environment? The answer must, necessarily, lie in the relations between the geographical and the behavioural or psychophysical environment and in the changes which, owing to this relationship, the latter undergoes in any behaviour act. I see an object flying through the air in my direction. I either step aside or hold out my hand so as to catch it. In the first case the object, say a ball, will fly past me in my behavioural environment and in my geographical one; in the second case, on the contrary, it will, provided I am skilful enough, be caught in my hand, again both behaviourally and geographically. Under normal conditions, then, certain results in the behavioural field can come about only through corresponding results in the geographical environment. Only when the real ball is in real contact with my real hand will the behavioural ball appear in my behavioural hand. Therefore behaviour, directed by and adapted to the behavioural world, must in cases like these also be adapted to the geographical world. How the Behavioural Environment Directs Behaviour. The question may be raised here, how the behavioural world manages to direct behaviour or, in our terminology, how it controls the executive. If an object comes hurtling towards us, no doubt we move so as to avoid it. But what is the actual occurrence in our nervous system? How does the perception of this moving object innervate our musculature? STIMULUs-REsPONSE THEORY REJECTED. We discussed a similar problem in our theory of reflex action. There we found the traditional pathway or connection hypothesis according to which such innervation was explained as the simple transmission of the nervous excitation from the centripetal to the centrifugal part of the preestablished reflex arc. A similar hypothesis would be advanced to explain our tast example; possibly some psychologists would even be inclined to take over the reflex arc concept without any modification; they would explain our stepping out of the path of an approaching missile as due to an original connection between the stimulus and the response. But such a simple transfer of the reflex arc theory is possible only by the surreptitious introduction of the words stimulus-response. The reflex arc hypothesis is an anatomical hypothesis, the reflex arc is a nervous structure with its real centripetal and centrifugal parts which are joined at a definite place in the nervous system. An excitation started on a certain point of the sense surface is conducted to a definite place in the centre and there switched over to a special centrifugal neuron. But if we react to a flying stone, the initiatory part of the reflex is not the stimulation of a point or a pattern of points on our retinae, but a process of motion produced within the central nervous system (see Chapter VII) by a real motion. Therefore the terminal point at which the excitation is to be switched over from the centripetal to the centrifugal branch of the arc is missing. Otherwise expressed, the reflex is not produced by a stimulus, the efferent impulse is not started at a particular place in the centre, but arises out of a process which in its turn has been caused by a spatio-temporal stimulus pattern. In short, the traditional reflex-arc or stimulus-response conception has to be modified to fit this case. It is, truly, impossible to reduce it to the simpler instances from which the reflex concept was originally E
