# MEMORY Foundation of a Trace Theory. Theoretical Section The Rôle of Memoiy Memory Not to Bc Consulered as a Specıl I aculty. Memory and Time Cin Mcmory Be Completly Rcduc to Iraces Iemporal Units Stout's Theory of Primary Rctcnuvenes The Sclf determination of Tcmporal Organızations. Good Continuation Spatiual ind Tmporal Organis itions Compared Objections to Our Tracc Hypothesis In Defence of Speculative Hypotheses ## THE ROLE OF MEMORY No fact has challenged the psychologist as much as the fact that we have a mcmory. 'I hrough memory we are at every moment connected with the past and the futurc; without memory we could not learn but would face each situation as we faced it the first time; wihout memory we could not act according to plans and resolves. No wonder, then, that in the development of psychology memory assumed the rôle it has playcd to the present day. In the eyes of the psychologists and the psy chologizing scientists memory became the chief cause of adjusted bchaviour, memory seemed to be the specific factor which distinguished lite and mind from machinelike nature. A horse driven a few times over the same road will know the way, and the coachman may, on his homeward journey, go to sleep, assured that the mare will take him back to the stable. But the driver of a motor car is in no such fortunate position. He cannot close his eycs trusting that his car will find the way. The horse has memory, the car not, and thcrefore, so psychologists concluded, the adjusted behaviour of the former was altogether due to memory, the unadjusted behaviour of the latter due to its lack of memory. Psychologists have even gone so far as to use the possession of mcmory by an animal as a criterion of its possessing consciousness, and some of the arguments in favour of vitalism have been based on memory. Thus the two radically opposed philosophies of vitalısm and empirıcısm both orıgınate in an acknowledgment of the unique properties and achievements of memory. ## MEMORY NOT TO BE CONSIDERED AS A SPECIAL FACULTY And yet, to the cold critic memory is but a word which labels a great number of different achievements without explaining them. And nothing is more dangerous to scientific progress than such a single word which tends to become reified, to be taken for an entity which produces all the different effects. Hughlings Jackson criticized the faculty concept of memory as early as 1866,1 and implicitly the wish to cscape from such a purely verbal explanation must have influenced all the various theories of memory that have arisen in the past. At the present time this determination has become conscious. Wheeler's atiempt at eliminating the concept of the memory trace seems to me born from this desire; but it is most clearly expressed by Humphrey, who writes of the acquisition of the skill of typewriting: "Sometimes, indeed, it is said that he can type better today because of his ‘Memory’ of his lessons; or it is a 'mnemic accumulation' or an ‘engram' that enables him to type better. Such special terms of course only push thc mystery a little farther back. They are as harmful as was the mediaeval explanation that the water rose in a pump because nature abhors a vacuum" (p. 103). ## MEMORY AND TIME Instead Humphrey sees the final solution of the problem of memory in a vicw which takes into account equally' space and time. "With certain reservations it is characteristic of higher forms of life that their behaviour is integrated over longer periods of time; and this possibility of relating events in the life history of an organism over longer time intervals corresponds objectively to one factor in what is meant by the possession of a 'better memory'" (p. 157). Memory, if this view were right, would not be a new and specific factor but a temporal aspect of behaviour itself. Let us follow up the clue. The Difficulties in the Concept of Time. Zeno's Paradox. It was Henri Bergson who called our attention to the fact that intellectually we are much better equipped to deal with spatial than with temporal relations. The "real" is thought of as timeless, viz., as the spatial constellation at a moment of time, i.e., at a time without extent, which is neither real nor time. And yet we are apt to say: only the present is real, for what preceded it is now past, and therefore no longer real, and what will follow upon it belongs to the future and is therefore not yet real. Plausible as such a proposition is, it involves an absurdity. For "the present" is undefinable. We can think of an interval of time becoming shorter and shorter, but however short we make it it still remains an interval, it still has duration. Let us begin with a time interval corresponding to one vibration of a tuning fork of 1oo vibrations per second. We decrease it so that it corresponds progressively to $\mathrm { ^ { 1 } / _ { 2 } , \ ^ { 1 } / _ { 1 0 } , \ ^ { 1 } / _ { 1 0 0 } , \ldots }$ of such a cycle. Theoretically we can go on indefinitely, and we never reach the value 0. If we did we should have lost both the interval and time with it. And yet the human mind wants to make that transition. In human experience time scems to be separable from space and therefore the human mind committed again and again the fallacy of separating these inseparables. Everybody knows Zeno's famous arguments against the reality of motion, which are based on just this wrong separation. Let us reca!l his paradox that Achilles could never pass a tortoise once he had given it a start, however fast he might run. At the beginning Achilles would start from scratch and the tortoise from a line 1o m. ahead of him. If now Achilles ran ten times as fast as the tortoise, what would happen? By the time he came to the starting point of the tortoise, the animal would be one metre further, i.e., when Achilles is 1o mn. from his start the tortoise is 1 m. from its. When Achilles reaches this point, after traversing $\yen 123,456$ the tortoise will still be ahead of him, having raced through ½o m. during this time. And this goes on. Whenever Achilles reaches the place where the tortoise was before, the latter is just ahead, and although the difference between their positions becomes increasingly smaller, it can ncver become zero. The table given on the following page clcarly represents this case. $\triangle \pmb { s }$ indicates the distance between the two rivals, and $\triangle \star$ the time passed between two consecutive moments of time considered, taking the time which Achilles needs to race 1o m. as the unit. This last column shows that Zeno's argument proves the irreality not only of motion but also of time, for the total time passed between the start and any of the positions increases in the same way as the distance between the runners decreases, 1.0–1.1-1.11-1.111 . . . , and one sees that this argument covers only a very small fraction of time, certainly less than 1.11111111-2 units and having as its upper limit $1 \%$ units. Since the unit of time again can be made as small as one likes—one need only give a smaller advantage to the tortoise and a greater difference of speed to the two competitors, without changing the power of the argument—the time during which Achilles cannot overtake the tortoise can be made as small as one likes, and since the argument proves that he can never overtake $\mathbf { i t } ,$ time itself vanishes. And it is clear that in a world without time there can be no motion. This reveals the fallacy of Zeno. His argument involves a vicious circle, since implicitly it denies the reality of time and thereby of motion, which he then concludes from it. But its power is due to our inclination to separate space from time and accord reality only to the former. In other words, his treatment of the race presupposes what it sets out to prove, $\mathrm { \bf { v } i } \mathbf { z } . ,$ that motion does not exist, for it lists the positions at which the runners are at various stages of their race. But a moving body never is at any TABLE 13
