# CHAPTER XII # LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS I Definition of Learning. Learning as Accomplishment and as Process. The Positions of Lashley and Humphrey. Learning as Process. When Does It Take Place?, Learning and Traces. Learning and Repetition. Three Problems Igvolved in Learning. Learning Defined by Process. Consolidation of Traces. Availability of Traces. Formation of Traces. The New Process. The After-effect of Traces. Acquisition of Skills. Associative Learning. The Doctrine of Associationism. Theory of Rote Learning. Summary: Arbitrary Connections Replaced by Dynamıc Otganizations. Association as a Force. Lewin. Other Types of "Associative Learning." The General Field-Influence Exerted by a Trace upon a Process ## DEFINITION OF LEARNING In our last chapter we developed a theory of "memorial fields," i.e., we tried to establish certain principles which explain why the psychophysical field at any one momcnt is affected by events which occurred in the past. We shall now test our trace theory by examining what light it sheds on those processes which evidently depend upon previous experience. In common parlance the term learning is used to denote this problem. For a long time learned activities were sharply distinguished from original or inherited ones, and a number of theories were proposed to explain this difference and with it the nature of learning. Lashley distinguishes five major types of such theories, some of them including several special modifications, and finds none of them acceptable in view of the established facts (1929 a, pp. 556 f.). It will not be necessary to repeat the criticism of these theories after Lashley's trenchant and lucid discussion, which was preceded and followed by other attacks (e.g., Koffka, 1928, and Tolman). Instead we shall discuss the meaning of the term learning in order to have a safe basis for our own theory. "Learning amounts to a change or modification of behaviour" (Woodworth, p. 163), or more fuly: "In general, however, we may say that learning is taking place wherever behaviour shows a progressive change or trend, with a repetition of the same stimulating situation and where the change cannot be accounted for on the basis of fatigue or of receptor and effector changes" (Hunter, p. 564). Humphrey, to quote lastly from this author, claims that modification of behaviour, though a necessary criterion, is not a sufficient cri- ## LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS , terion of learning. "Where there is learning the later actions of the series ordinarily differ from the earlier ones in the direction of the organism's advantage." And: "In order then to exhibit learning, a series of organic actions must first of all be such that later terms presupposc earlier ones, which is the same thing as to say that modification has taken place; but in addition the series will generally show a general approximation to an optimal term, optimal, that is to say, from the point of view of systemic conservation" (p. 105). ## LEARNING AS ACCOMPLISHMENT AND AS PROCESS. THE POSITIONS ## OF LASHLEY AND HUMPHREY All three authors, and the last most clearly and consciously, define learning as an accomplishment and not as a process or performance. Thus by their definition they raise the problem as to the nature of the process or processes which account for this accomplishment, a problem which Lashley formulates in thcse tesms: . . . we are justified in raising the question whether the concept of learning or of memory embraces a unitary process which can be studied as a single problem, or whether it may not instead cover a great variety of phenomena having no common organic basis" (p. 525). Humphrey, on the other hand, intends to find such a common principle in all learning accomplishments. We have seen in Chapter X that he rejects any theory of learning which introduces a specific new factor differcent from those that explain other types of behaviour. His positive thesis is that learning can be explained as an integrated reaction, integrated not only in space but also in time. ". . . it may be repeated that starting from the conception of the organism as rcacting or adjusting to a single stimulus or situation, learning must be considered as the process of making an adjustment or total reaction to a total series of such stimuli or situations. It is essentially similar to the process familiar as the act of responding to a situation by means of an integrative process. It involves no new principle, but mcrely the extension of one already known" (p. 104). "“Al integration is four dimensional, it is integration of organic processes, events, corresponding t external changes that are four dimensional also. . . . If, then, we regard the act of 'associative memory' not in itself but together with the preceding acts that go to form the total relevant series, we have a unified total Response to a four-dimensional Situation, requiring fourdimensional integration of neural impulses" (p. 117). “Köhler's chimpanzee connected into a unity two sticks and the banana which were simultaneously presented in space. The animal's reaction is to the total spatio-temporal situation including these three specific elements, which the creative, integrative activity of the animal has interrelated. In the same way the animal learning by repetition effects a similar creative integration involving the similar elements in the repeated situation"(pp. 119-20). "Learning has been defined as the act of adjustment to a complex repeutive situation" (p. 124). The difference between Lashley and Humphrey is more apparent than real. It hinges on the term "common organic basis." If this is to mean that special “mechanism" involved in different acts of learning, Humphrey would agree thoroughly with Lashley; but by his unitary theory of learning he means a community of principle or law, which under different conditions, i.e., for different performances and in different individuals and species, may lead to very different actual occurrences, but as such is nevertheless the same in all of them. And this, Lashley in his turn might easily accept. Criticism of Humphrey. As previously stated I am in full accord with Humphrey in his attempt at explaining learning, or memory, without the introduction of a special faculty. But his solution, as presented in the preceding quotations, seems to me at least incomplete. I am not certain whether I understand Humphrey correctly; therefore the following critical remarks, although aimed at him, may not strike him; even so they would not be entirely lost inasmuch as they deal with a position which it is tempting to take. FoUR-DIMENsIONAL ORGANIZATION. We have argued ourselves (in Chapter X) that reality cannot be treated in terms of space alone, that the time dimension must necessarily be included. From this insight it is easy to pass on to a theory in which the four-dimensional space-time continuum plays the same rôle which the three-dinensional space continuum plays in spatial organization, a rôle in which all four dimensions are absolutely equivalent. Such a theory, if it .were tenable, would solve many of our problems much more directly and simply. We might, e.g., consider a one-dimcnsional structure in this four-dimensional continuum different irom a point, like a melody. And then we could say that the melody was organized in the time dimension just as a curve is organized in space-dimensions. I resisted this temptation in thc case of the mclody, and other temporal units, because it seemed to me to be no more than a formal analogy devoid of a concrete dynamical meaning. Since I shall now criticize Humphrey's application of a similar conception to learning I shall omit a detailed discussion of my refusal to treat time units in this manner. Moreover, several of my reasons are implicitly contained in my earlier arguments. My criticism of Humphrey starts from his concept of the total four-dimensional situation to which there is a total and unified response. The quotation from page 105 given on page 53o continues: "Because the series consists of related terms it is a unity." I find both terms, "total situation" and "fourdimensionally integrated reaction," inadequate not because they are intrinsically bad, but because without further elaboration they are not concrete enough. How is the “total situation" to be defined? We saw the difficulty inherent in this concept when it is used in a purely spatial counotation (see Chapter IV, pp. 158 f.). How much more difficult does it become when the time dimension is included! Without modification the "total situation" is the whole spatiotemporal life history of the person. But no process is explained if it is referred to this practically infinite mass of events. Humphrey, very appropriately, speaks of repetitions of a stimulus situation which form a total situation in their entirety, i.e., he specifies "total situations" so as to mean something different for each special occasion. If I learn to type, the former occasions on which I practised, together with the present, form the total situation; if I try to learn to play tennis, all my efforts in this direction make the total situation, etc., etc. Therefore, the specific total situation cannot simply be taken for granted; instead we must explain why certain past events and not others join with the present occasion to form a total situation. The mere recourse to four-dimensional space-time avails us nothing in the solution of this problem. The same conclusion arises from a different starting point. Not all objects "learn," although they all occur and behave in the four-dimensional continuum. A billiard ball is “as good" when it is brand new as after it has been used for years, because it is so elastic that it regains its original shape after each deformation produced by cue or cannoning ball. For the billiard ball the past does not exist. Therefore, objects which have memory, be they pieces of wire or human organisms, must be different from billiard balls, in the sense that they never regain their old status. completely, once they have been affected. We called the change which cannot be completely annihilated in objects with memory, a trace. By means of this concept, finally, we were able to overcome another difficulty inherent in Humphrey's four-dimensional total situation: the difficulty, namely, how the past can affect the present (see Chapter X, p. 429), a difficulty which seems to me not solved by the mere reference to space-time. Let us now turn to the second term, the unity of the learning series, the four-dimensionally integrated reaction. While our attitude to the first, the four-dimensional total situation, was to consider it incomplete without the assumption of traces and a principle of selection, our attitude to the second must be somewhat different The term applies very well to melodics and other temporal units. But does it apply in the same way to the progressive learning series? Humphrey, although he has not discussed the example of the melody, has seen this difficulty. He compares an ordinary purposive activity with learning activities and claims that they are essentially similar in nature. "The fact that learning ordinarily implies an intermittent series of actions, the animal being put into the maze three times a day, for example, while in the interval it is in its cage, does not constitute an essential difference between the purposive and the learned activity. For many 'purposes' are interrupted in the same way"(p. 127). Now one may well admit that interruptions qua interrupuons do not constitute an essential difference between the two kinds of activities and yet may withhold assent to the statement that therefore the two activities are essentially similar. For a purposive activity or a melody completed after an interruption is still one and the same action or melody. The dynamic situation is such that the completion is demanded and that the interruption has the function of an obstacle. But the repetition of a purposive action or of a melody is not the same action or mclody as the irst; there need be nothing in the dynamic situation that demands repetition. The second occurrence, besides being numerically different, will also in many cases be qualitatively different—that is what we call learning, and that is what we want to explain. To call the first and the second event together a total reaction seems to me neither to be correct nor to supply that explanation. It is not correct in the sense in which one action or melody is a total reaction, for in these all parts demand and support each other in one continuous process, or if the purposive act is interrupted bcfore completion, at least in one directed tension. Particularly in the melody the end requires the middle and the beginning and derives its meaning from them, while in the repetitions of one and the same event no such relation necessarily holds. If, for instance, a person could execute a perfect tennis stroke the first time he made it, all the training that is ordinarily necessary would be superfluous. A perfect stroke is a perfect stroke and no different whether it is executed after much or little practice. Furthermore, often enough the repetition occurs undemanded by the earlier occasions. That means: the later process, which derives some of its characteristics from the earlier ones, often requires the occurrence of some event in the geographical environment that is con- ## 534 LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS tingent or adventitious with regard to the previous events. These previous events are over and done with, they contain in themselves no factor that can produce an occasion for the renewed occurrence of a similar event. A very simple example: a person comes for the first time in his life to a place where there is heavy snow. He will find walking through the slippery streets a very difficult task. If the snow stays on the ground, he will gradually become more surefooted, but his action of walking on it is over when he has reached his destination, and whether the snow stays or goes or whether a new blizzard presents him with new opportunities for “practising" has nothing to do with his accomplishment. This contingency of the occasions that are necessary for the repetition of the processes again makes it impossible for me to accept the sum of the subsequent repetitions as one total response. Learning as Process. When Does It Take Place? This criticism of some of Humphrcy's concepts does not, however, imply that we disagree with him in his general position that learning must be explained without the introduction of a new specific principle. To see this, and thereby how close our position is to Humphrey's, we shall analyze some learning activities raising the question when in these activities learning takes place. Since the greater part of learning occurs without the intention to learn, we shall choose cases of this kind. They include all animal learning, for an animal in its trials runs for food or to escape punishment, or to explore, or for some other reasons, but certainly not in order to learn. The same is true of many human activitics, such as the one last discussed, the improvement of a person's ability to walk on slippery streets, and also of the acquisition of language by an infant, or the “learning of the lesson of experience" in the social situations of the adult; here the behaviour is directed towards good and tactful conduct, and again not towards learning. But let us start from a simple example. How does the stranger from a more clement climate learn to walk safely over frozen ground? Let us, for simplicity's sake, assume that already on the second occasion he is more skilful. Is this second performance the learning? Certainly not; it is, as everyone will agree, a learned activity to the extent that it is dependent upon the first. Then the first performance must be the learning activity, and yet it had nothing to do with learning qua learning, but served only the purpose of going from one place to another. As such, then, it has no claim to be called a learning activity, whereas viewed retrospectively from the improved second performance it must be so called. What is true of the first holds equally for the second, for a third performance would show a new improvement, and so forth. Learning and Traces. This case is typical, and it shows that any activity might be called a learning activity, provided it fulfilled some special conditions which we shall state later. This proposition might look like a purcly verbal solution of a real problem, but this is not its intent. We can show in what respect, or why, an activity is a learning activity. Supposing that the organism, after a process had occurred in its psychophysical field, returned çompletely to its old state, like the billiard ball of our previous discussion. Then each process occurring on repeated occasions would be similar to the first process, differing from it only inasmuch as the external conditions, or the desires and interests of the organism, were different. But the former performances could not be responsible for improvement in the later ones: the same system exposed to the same forces for a number of times must react each time in exactly the same manner. As a response to the set of external and internal conditions the first response is thus not a learning response, for it might be the same as it is now if the organism were totally “clastic," i.e., if it re-instated its old condition completely after the pcrformance is past. But we know that the organism is not of this kind; it cannot return to its old state because the process itself effects a permanent change in it, the trace. Such a changed organism, if exposed a second time to the same stimulus situation, must, qua diferent organism, behave differently the second time from what it did the first time. Therefore the first performance, inasmuch as it leaves a trace, is a learning process, provided we use modification of behaviour as synonymous with learning, a usage which Humphrey has criticized for good reasons, reserving the term learning for such modifications as show "improvement." Improvement looks like a purely pragmatic criterion. Although I agrec with Humphrey that it is not, but points to a much more essential feature of the modification, I shall leave this point open for the moment. At present it is sufficient to point out that the process by leaving a trace must modify later processes in some respects, improvement being but one of the possibilities. But all possibilities of modification, whether we dub them learning or not, must be derivable from the same principle, the special kind of modification depending upon the particular nature of the case in a manner to be discussed presently. Our Theory Consistent with Humphrey's Main Principle. But first it will be worth our while to consider how far we have lived up to Humphrey's principle that no new factor is to be introduced to ## 536 LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS explain learning. The result of such reflection must be that we have not violated this postulate. We included in our explanation nothing but the process itself with its effect on the organism, called a trace. This is no new assumption. It is not self-evident that a process should leave no trace, and therefore the assumption of such a trace is not the introduction of a new factor. The organism is in this respect similar to many inorganic systems. Therefore, if we use the term in the widest possible sense, it is perfectly correct to say that every process is in some respect a learning process. Learning and Repetition. This wide use of the term has, however, its disadvantages. To quote again from Humphrey: "A burnt child that used its experience in order to acquire deftness in plunging its hands into the flames would be a candidate for an institution" (p. 105). To give a different example: repetition may lead to bad habits as well as to good ones; thus it is very difficult to learn to pronounce a word correctly once one has acquired the habit of pronouncing it incorrectly, a fact I know well from my own experience.¹ The same is true in acquiring a motor skill, be it the proper stroke at tennis, the position of the body in skiing, or anything else. One may easily start “wrong" and then acquire bad habits which will prevent one from really "learning" the desired activity. In such cases practice does not lead to an “optimum," regarded from the point of view of adjustment to the specific situation, even though the modifications produccd by such bad practice may have a direction towards a final term. And so we can now resume the question which we held in abeyance as to the causcs which determine the rôle of practice or repetition; whether it leads to real learning in Humphrey's sense, to bad habits, or has no effect at all. An example for this last case is taken from Köhler's anthropoid work. The reader may remember that one of the problems set to the apes required the stacking of boxes for the attainment of the goal. This activity became a real pastime for the animals, which practised it continually over a long period, with the striking result that they showed no improvement whatever. Their stacking was, at the end as at the beginning, a mere piling of one box on top of one or two others without any regard to the stability of the structure achieved. Only because of their great skill and uncanny bodily balance were they able to reach the suspended fruit before the shaky edifice on which they stood collapsed. Köhler's film and to some extent the pictures in his book show the nature of this performance which will raise the hair of the spectator. Why, however, was there no improvement? Why did the traces of the previous performances not influence the execution of the later ones so as to make them progressively better and better? Why, otherwise expressed, was the practice of the apes in box stacking so different in its effects from the practice of a human pupil in a typewriting school? Repetition of Accomplishment and Repetition of Process. No ex. planation can be given as long as one thinks of these activities in terms of accomplishment. If one activity improves through practice while another one does not, the reason must be that the traces are different in the two kinds of practice in such a way that this difference accounts for the difference in the effect of practice. This does not mean that the traces of the two accomplishments, typing and box stacking, are thus different; for one could think of conditions under which practice with the typewriter causes no gain in typing ability—e.g., when a child plays with it before he can read or write—and conversely box stacking by human beings may very well be improved by practice. Therefore the processes which produce the traces must be different in two activities which show such different effects of practice, no matter whether these processes correspond to the same or to different accomplishments. In the case of the apes, box stacking was merely the action of getting one on top of the other; the aspect of doing this in a mechanically stable way, involving definite spatial relationships of the top of the lower and the bottom of the higher box, was totally absent from their behaviour, i.e., from the processes which actually occurred in their psychophysical field, and therefore also from the traces which these processes left behind. But the trace field as a remnant of a process distribution has nothing in it to influence a new process occurring under similar stimulus conditions that would make the process distribute itself in a direction different from the one to which it owes its existence. Rather, the ordinary facts of practice prove that repetition of activity A will create an aggregated trace system of such a kind that activity A will become more stable and regular and thereby exclude variation into a very different activity B. Applied to the box stacking this means that improvement of this performance can occur in the direction of greater stability of the structures created only when at one stage in the series of building activities the process itself has something to do with this stability so that the trace left by it can influence the following performance. Generally speaking, if an ac- ## 538 LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS complishment X involves the aspects A, B, C . . . , then improvement can occur only in those aspects which were, in however low a degree, also represented in the process and were thereby left in the trace system. Since every accomplishment is of this type, repetition can lead to improvement only to the extent to which the partial aspects'are present in performances. If, in accomplishing X, I have not performed A, although I have accomplished it, this performance will have no practice effect for the future accomplishment of A, however much practice effect it may have on other aspects of X which were part of my actual performance. Repetition of Occasion. Its Two Functions. Consequently repetition of the same accomplishment may have very different effects if during this series an aspect A occurs for the first time. Before this occurrence repetition can have no effect for A; afterwards it can. Repetition of the occasion, therefore, has a double function for learning. On the one hand it gives a number of opportunities for the particular process to occur for the first time. Up to that point it has no influence on later performances of this process. On the other hand, once the particular proccss has occurred each repetition will add to the particular trace system or aggregate and thereby exert an influence on later performances. Since repetitions have thus a difercnt function before and after a critical occasion the mere counting of repetitions per se does not seem to be valuable for a better understanding of the learning process unless the cxperimenter knows beforehand that the process in the development of which he is interested occurred at the first repetition. Thcrefore, much experimental work on memory possesses less signifcance than has been attributed to it. REPETITION OF PROCESS AND ToLMAN's PoSITION: THE LAW OF FreQuency. According to our theory repctition affects learning directly only qua repetition of the process. This scems at first sight to be in contradiction to Tolman's position, although a closer inspection seems to me to reveal that the two positions are more or less identical. Tolman distinguishes bctween two meanings of the law of frequency, one of which he considers corrcct; the other, the one usually given to it, he shows to be contradicted by the facts. "The Law of Exercise . . . holds, we shall asserţ, when that which is meant by exercise is frequent and recent repetition of the whole stimulus situation, irrespective of whether in the given trial the animal chooses a correct or an incorrcct path. Exercise in this sense means the frequency and recency with which the whole problem, as a problem, is met and responded to" (p. 346). "In the second meaning of the Law of Exercise . . . what is meant by frequent and recent exercise seems to be frequent and recent 'differential' exercise upon the correct path at the expense of the incorrect paths" (p. 347). These statements might be read so as to contain a theory the direct opposite of the one here presented. Tolman's true law seems to treat repetition as repetition of an accomplishment, the false as that of a performance and process, whereas in our theory the rôles were exactly reversed. But as already pointed out, this impression would be erroneous. From Tolman's apt and trenchant refutation of the false interpretation it appears that in this form of the theory repetition really means accomplishment, and from the later statement of his own law, that the first interpretation really refers to performance or process. It is hardly necessary to devote much space to the interpretation rejected by Tolman, since its main supporter, Thorndike, has repudiated it himself on account of his own extended experiments. I shall only demonstrate by one example why Tolman's criticism can be translated into the terms: accomplishment vs. process. If an animal learns to run through the correct path because all blind alleys are blocked, then his process of running through these correct paths leads to the same accomplishmcnt as that of an animal which makes a perfect run after having learned the maze with the blinds unobstructed, but qua process it is totally different. To run through the only open path is different from running over a path which at various points forks in two or more directions so as to necessitate a choice. Only when choice can occur during the learning will the performance have the "choice" character, otherwise it wil not, and therefore an animal which has been trained with entrances of culs-de-sac blocked has not learned "the maze"; i.e., it will commit errors as soon as the blocks are removed. Tolman reproduces a quotation from Carr, from whose work this example is taken. With the omission of the first sentence this quotation follows: ". . . a certain number of errors must be made and eliminated before the subject is ever able to run the maze correctly. Correct modes of response are established in part by learning what not to do." LEARNING wHAT NOT To Do. Carr's highly instructive results offer a convincing argument against a wrong interpretation of the rôle of repetition. But Carr's words as just quoted do not do full justice to this significance, because Carr speaks in terms of accomplishment and not of performance. It is perectly true to say, as hc does, that in order to learn what to do we must also lcarn what not to $\mathbf { d o } ,$ but this statement, referring as it does to accomplishments, must be translated into terms of performance or process. Let us try to do tempt, discover easily enough for himself whether God needs memory or for which of his functions he needs it. The Circular Relation Between Process and Trace as the Cause of Mental Development. We shall stay on this earth, and there new processes occur in systems already endowed with traces; it is this fact alone that makes mental development intelligible. For by occurring in trace-endowed systems processes will be influenced by these traces, and the novelty of a process itself may in a large measure be duc to the traces. Such a new process leaves a new trace in its wake, which in its turn may contribute to the arousal of another new process which without it could not have arisen. Thus by processes making traces, and traces processes, the system is bound to devclop if for the moment we mean by development the production of ever new processes. It is obvious that development in this sense depends entircly on the effects that traces can exert on later proccsses, i.e., on the solution of our problem (3). Associationism and the Problem of Achievement. Traditional empiricism, whıch in the preceding chapters I so frequently made the butt of my criticism, has been thc failure I consider it to be because it never recognized the full import of this problem. And this lack of insight is closely related to its complete elimination of the first problem, our problem of achievement. Empiricism has been based on two basic concepts: sensation and association. The first of these two has been criticized in an earlier chapter (Chapter III, p. 1o3 f.); the second one requires a few words of comment. I shall forbear to go into the long history of associationism. Suffice it to say that in this history the concept, while becoming more and more sharply defined, was at the same time narrowed down to one and only one type of relation. Whercas originally several kinds of association had been distinguished, viz., association by contiguity, by similarity, and by contrast, only the first survived in the process of development, reaching its climax in the concept of the conditioned reflex. Association by contiguity established a purely existential and external relation bciween any two events that happen to occur in spatial or, temporal neighbourhood. The associative bond between the two'items A and B is, according to strict associationism, due exclusively to their occurring together and is quite independent of the intrinsic characteristics of A and B. Radical associationism will even explain the differcnces between A and B, apart from diferences in sensory content—blue, red, loud, sweet, etc.—by association: since association obtains as a rule not between "simple sensations"—a concept which was a crux in every associationistic system—but between perceived objects, these objects were themselves explained as complexes of sensations held together by particularly strong associative bonds. Thus associationists were by the very extension of their fundamental assumption prevented from ascribing any importance to the intrinsic qualities of the associated items, all such items differing from each other merely in associative combination and the scnse qualities of their elementary constituents. Associationism was therefore bound to react violently against gestalt theory, which, as we demonstrated in the prcceding chapters, has a very definite and important place for real intrinsic differences betwecn behavioural objects, intrinsic differences which are not reducible to association. The most detailed and impassioned associationistic attack against gestalt theory came from G. E. Muller, who published a special monograph against it (1923). Since Köhler (1925 a) replied extensively to this attack, showing the inconsistencies of Muller's arguments and the ad hoc hypotheses which again and again he had to attach to his old system in order to deal with facts discovered by gestalt theorists, I need not pursue this matter any further. The one important point for us to note about associationism is that it knows only one kind of connection or interaction between elements, that of association. Wherever parts of a larger whole are found to hang together in some way or other, such communication is described and treated as association, a purely external and existential bond. Thus the members of a learned series of nonsense syllables are not only associated one with the other-in various degrees, according to proximity and other factors—but also with the place they occupy in the total serics, which in persons with imaginal diagrams like number-forms mcans association with a spatial locus, just as a quotation, whose position on the page we remembcr, is in this view associated with the particular part of the page. Similarly, if we scc a square and not four lines, it is because these four lines have become associated, and so forth. Such a theory can know no real problem of achievement. The new process which is to be learned, i.e., strengthened by repetition, is always a process of association, and since its one cause was considered 'to be contiguity, no problem cven arose as to what produced such a new association. As far as I know, associationism, which based its theory on experiments of the rote learning type, has never felt the need to tackle this problem. A new situation for associationism arose, howevcr, when the experimental base was changed. We gain a new point of view for evaluating the achicvement of Thorndikc's first animal experiments when we compare them with the ## LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS experiments invented, refined, and almost endlessly repeated in Germany. For in Thorndike's experiments an animal has truly to learn something new which is not presented to it readymade as the nonsense syllables are to the human subject. Therefore something like our problem of achievement arose; how does the animal arrive at the correct response for the first time? But Thorndike's associationism prevented him from seeing the real significance of this problem, because he never doubted that associationism, or “connectionism" an even more rigid form of the same general way of thinking—was the only way of explaining it. And so he invented his principle of multiple response, in which all responses that the animal can make in any situation are lying ready within the animal as inherited reflex connections. I have discussed Thorndike's thcories in another book (1928, pp. 130, 138, 18o f.), and therefore refrain from repeating my argument. Against its critical tendency I want here to emphasize the great potential gain which psychology derived from the change of method introduced by Thorndike, a change of method which, has prepared the way for the recognition of the true problem and has tremendously broadened the discussion of the problem of learning by the introduction of thc much debated law of success which we shall discuss later. ## LEARNING DEFINED BY PROCESS Let us briefly summarize what we have gained, by giving a new explanatory definition of learning. Learning, as the modification of an accomplishment in a certain direction, consists in creating trace systems of a particular kind, in consolidating them, and in making them more and more available both in repeated and in new situations. This describes learning because available traces modify new processes and thereby achieve modification of behaviour and accomplishment. Consolidation of Traces. Little need be said about the consolidation of traces, for we have discussed in various parts of our last chapter a number of causes which counteract consolidation. We may summarize these discussions in our present context by saying that consolidation will be achieved by stable articulate organization. Inarticulate organization, mere aggregation, is detrimental to consolidation, as von Restorff has shown, and similarly traces of chaotic processes are unstable. Articulate organization has two aspects. In the first place the individual trace may be more or less articulate, in the second the trace may be a more or less articulate and significant part in one or several larger trace systems. Thus repetition may play a third rôle which we have not yet discussed. If the same process occurs repeatedly in different contexts it may gain stability by the place it assumes in the trace systems of each of these contexts. The rules which we have laid down for consolidation are not mere empirical rules but follow directly from our laws of organization. We know that segregation and unification require inhomogeneity and vary directly with the degree of inhomogeneity. In “aggregates" each trace finds itself in a quasi-homogeneous environment and must for that reason lack stability. Conversely, an "isolated" trace is a region of inhomogeneity, and for that reason stable. But we saw that degree of inhomogeneity is by no means the only factor determining organization. We found besides such factors as good continuation and closure. If we apply these to traces we are led to our rule that articulate organization favours stability. For a trace which forms a “good" part of a larger system is maintained by the forces of the whole system, while one that does not conform to the pattern of the whole will be exposed to forces within this whole which tend to change it. A New DouBLE RôLe oF RepEtition: A Paradox. Yct this cannot be enough. Repetition is without a doubt, to a ccrtain extent and under definite conditions, a very powerful factor in stabilizing traces. This fact introduces into our theory a sort of paradox which we shall have to solve. For we saw that repetition cannot mean the strengthening of one trace but the building up of a trace system composed of as many members as there are repetitions. Thus we obtain necessarily an aggregate of traces which should interfere with consolidation. This seems paradoxical in view of the beneficial rôle which repetition plays in all learning, but in reality it is not. For the effect which we have just derived from our theory, interference with the stability of a trace by repctition of a process, actually occurs. There is loss of consolidation of the single individual traces which we are apt to overlook because it is accompanied by a gain in the stability of the trace system. When we learn to type, the individual lessons will soon be forgotten, and the clumsy movements which we originally executed will at a later stage be impossible; i.e., the traces of the first lessons have become changed by the aggregate of traces which has been produccd by the many repetitions and is responsible for the improvement of the skill. Similarly, when we stay in a room for any length of time, we get a great number of impressions of it by moving about or merely letting our eyes roan. But only a few of them can be recalled. It is needless to give more examples. It is quite generally confirmed that repetition interferes with the in- ## 546 LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS dividual traces, just as von Restorff's theory demands. At the same time, however, the trace system becomes more and more fixed, it acquires a greater and greater influence on future processes. It is thcrefore at least a plausible hypothesis to assume that the extension of the trace system is one of the factors which determine its efficacy, an extension which is steadily increased with each new repetition. Perhaps this conclusion should be correlated with Lashley's discovcry that the extent to which behaviour detcriorates through brain injury is a direct function of the amount of tissue destroyed. Be this as it may, our paradox has bcen solved; we understand now how repetition can be beneficial to learning despite its destructive influence on individual traces. Availability of Traces. Our discussion of the aspect of learning which concerns the availability of traces can be equally short. At the end of the last chapter we have said all we can say about the causes of availability. The applications to the learning process are too obvious to require further elaboration. Only one point may be added. In introducing the present topic we distinguishcd availability for identical or very similar and for different and new situations. TiE TrANsfER ProbLEM GeNERALizED. The latter has a great deal to do with the transfer problem. The name transfer implies that psychologists considercd it as thc "normal" case that a trace should influence a similar process, and therefore gave the name of transfer to cases where performances of one kind exerted, through their traces, an influence on different performances not separately practised. But this mode of treating the general problem, practical as it is for a number of special problems, does not seem to be entirely adequate to the fundamental problem of learning, if by learning we mean any influence exerted by a trace on a later performance. Viewed in this broad frame, the effect of a trace or a trace system on processes similar to those which have produced them is but a special case, and to consider it as the normal may easily distort our view of the problems involved. For we do not rcally know of what kind this inluence is. It has to be studied in the same way as any other influence. Methodologically it is most simple to investigate learning by repetition of process, and the greater bulk of the vast literature on learning has uscd this method. But it would be wrong to ascribe a special importance or unique significance to a special case merely because it is most amcnable to scientific treatment. A rat, to give an example, can be trained to go to the food box of a maze by being put into the entrance box in a hungry condition and being fed each time it reaches the food compartment. But experiments on so-called "latent learning," emphasized by Tolman (pp. 343 f.), have proved that a rat also learns the maze to a considerable extent if before the “critical runs," when it is hungry and finds food in the food chambers, it has been allowed to roam about the maze freely and explore it thoroughly. Here roaming around, following all sorts of different paths, has the effect that the “true" path is taken with far fewer errors than it would have been had the other activity not preceded the “critical" one. Cases like this demonstrate the inadequacy of the term transfer. If we callcd the effect of the latent learning a transfer, then we ought to know," or assume, what the direct, non-transfer, effect of the exploring runs is. Does the animal in these experiments learn directly to follow a very special path, an acquisition which can be "transferred" to a new, the "true," path? Certainly not. The animals do not, in these experiments, become fixed to any particular pattern of alleys bcfore the critical runs begin. What they acquire is an orientation within thc maze, a sort of "plan" of the maze. This acquisition, which has a direct effect on the discovery of the true path, is in itsclf a case whcre traces of one kind of process, i.e., roaming about, gradually produce another process, i.e., knowing the layout of the maze. PossIBLE CoNFLICt BEtWEEn Two KINDs OF AvaILaBILITY. DRILl. How traces become more available for such new processes is a question we cannot yet even begin to answer. All we can say is that it must depend upon the nature of the trace and the new process. However, one conclusion seems fairly safe: conditions which make a trace more and more available for mere repetition of one process will often make it at the same time less available for other processes. Thus the educator should be very conscious of his aims when he decides whether to apply drill or not. Drill will no doubt make the traces more and morc available for one kind of activity, but it may at the same time narrow down the range of availability. Formation of Traces. The "New" Process. We are then left with the first of the three effects found necessary for learning (sce p. 544), the creation of the proper trace. Since traces are creatcd by processes, this leads us to a consideration of process itsclf with regard to learning. We said before that any process might be considered as a learning process inasmuch as its repetition would, qua repetition, be different from the first occurrence. Therefore, when in our present context we treat of the first arousals of processes, we must be as inclusive as possible. We are dealing here with the prpblem previously named the problem of achievement; but this name is apt to bias our attitude towards the problem; we think of processes not easily ## 548 LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS aroused, achieved the first time with more or less difficulty, and by their very occurrence raising the intellectual level of the organism. But important as such cases are, they are not the only ones that must be considered now; we must include in our survey every new process, unconcerned with the degree of difficulty with which it is aroused. When we see an ink blot of a new shape, this perception is a new process; when we walk through a picture gallery and see new pictures, other new processes occur; again when we hear for the first time a new simple tune, or a complex piece of music. If we contrast with these cases the understanding of a mathematical proof or, even better, the discovery or invention of such a proof, we sce the enormous variety of processes, different in quality and in ease of arousal; at the same time we see that with regard to the second point the difference is a graded one. There are not only cases where the process is aroused at once by the forces of the proximal stimuli and others where a long and laborious effort is necessary to produce it; there are numberless intermediate cases, as exemplified by the complex piece of music which we understand better with each new repetition. All cases, however, have one aspect in common: at a definite moment in the life history of the organism a certain process must arise for the first time and leave a corresponding trace which remains as a condition for an unlimited numbcr of later processes. That this condition itself is not immutable we have discussed in the two preceding chapters, notably in our theory of forgetting. But the fact remains that potentially every new process may affect later processes through its trace, so that each process alters the organism, i.e., is a process of learning. Therefore our scientific attitude with regard to this accomplishment must of necessity be unduly limited if we view learning only as either rote learning or the acquisition of a motor skill, or the gradually improved performances in mazes or puzzle boxes. It is clear how emphasis on rote learning has led to the theory of associations, and how this theory in its turn has influenced the explanation of the other accomplishments first enumerated. If we free ourselves from the limitations imposed upon older theories by too narrow and one-sided a selection of empirical material, we shall gain a much broader view of the processes occurring in progressive learning. "INNATE" AND "AcQuIRED." At the same time the time-honoured distinction between innate and acquired processes gains a new aspect. As I have pointed out elsewhere (r932) it is wrong to speak of innate processes. What is innate is structure, structure which will carry processes only when special forces arouse them. Even the first processes, which occur when the organism has as yet no traces, cannot be called innate: they are the reactions of the traceless organism to a definite set of stimuli. To stress this point may seem pedantic. Nobody can have meant anything else when he spoke of innate processes. But pedantry, as the making explicit of what previously had been at best implicit, may be very valuable by formulating the assumptions contained in a theory, so that one knows what they are and what they are not. In our case the formulation that structure is innate but processes are not, adds very definitely to the understandihg of the naturenurture dichotomy. For it makes it explicit that each process depends upon a set of conditions, of which the innate structure is one, the factual stimuli are another, and the laws of organization a third. That the second factor was extraneous to the dilemma of inherited vs. acquired would have been admitted by everyone, although it would not have appeared as a particularly important point. But that the third factor also lies entirely beyond this distinction has been overlooked for the mere fact that organization itself played no rôle in traditional systems of psychology. The result was that when gestalt psychologists introduced the concept of organization, other psychologists, accustomed to think in terms of innate and acquired, interpreted organization and its laws as something innate, thereby ascribing to gestalt theory a sort of psychological Kantian a priori. But as we have emphasized, the laws of organization fall entirely outside the scope of our dichotomy. The laws of electric potential, of surface tension, of maximum or minimum energy, hold for any system and are quite indepcndent of the particular system considered, much as the nature of those systems will determine the actual processes which follow from these universal laws. To call these laws innate is therefore nonsensical; for innate can only mean: dependent upon the particular nature of the system as it is on account of its biological origin. SEVERAL KINDS OF PROCESSES. (a) DIRECTLY STIMULUS-CONDITIONED oNEs. We return to the processes themselves. Are we justified in including in our account of learning those which arise directly upon stimulation without pre-existing traces? If the stimuli alone can produce a certain process, how can the trace become effective when the stimuli are repeated; in other words, how in such cases can learning take place? This is really a quaestio facti: Does learning take place under these conditions, will repetition of the same stimuli produce the same process or not? The answer to this question cannot be in doubt: Learning does take place; the second ex- ## 55O LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS perience is not, as a rule, exactly like the first. On the one hand the second experience is “familiar," it is being recognized, and as such it is different from the first. But at the same time it will also change qualitatively in some aspect of organization. This will even be true of the simplest possible process, the perception of, say, a white circle on a black background. All our knowledge of early stages of mental development indicates that the first process aroused by such stimulation will be far less sharp and defined than later processes; a vague circular blur will appear at first, where later a sharply bounded circle will be seen. The' normal environment of the newly born organism does not, of coûrse, contain such simple stimuli. No such simple process, therefore, can be aroused, but again it is impossible to believe that the infant perceives the mothcr's face from the beginning in the same way as it does latcr. Generalizing, we must say that a trace left by a process must affect the process occurring with a repetition of the stimuli, even when the first process was directly and exclusively stimulus-determined. (b) TRANSFORMATION OF ONE PROCESS INTO ANOTHER. The nature of this influence of traces upon latcr processes will be discussed presently. At the moment we turn to the arousal of such processes as do not stand in such a simplc rclation to thc stimulus. It is typical of these cases that a reaction $\mathbf { R } _ { 1 }$ to a stimulus complex S changes into the reaction $\bf { R _ { 2 } } ,$ and the question arises: Why does this transformation take place? Now in a majority of occasions this change will occur through the introduction of ncw traces into the ficld of the process, so that the solution of our prescnt problem will be dependent on our discussion of the influcnces exerted by traces on later processes, though over and above this problem it involves the other, of how the trace ficld becomes extended, and why in the particular way which brings about the new proccss $\mathtt { R } _ { 3 }$ . There are, however, other cases. The whole matcrial may be presented simultaneously or quasi-simultaneously, i.e., within the scope of a temporal unit, and yet the proper process may not take place. $^ { \mathfrak { s o } } \mathbf { I }$ try to explain to my students a somewhat difficult demonstration of à mathematical theory, putting all my scntences togcther with the utmost care in the right sequence and with all possible clearncss. I shall probably not have much success in my first performance. Something remains dull in the faces of my audience." Some students may, however, "understand" the argument, and others will understand it after one or more repetitions, which in this case serve chiefly to keep the "material" present to their minds. Here a change takes place from processes $\bar { \mathbf { R _ { 1 } } } ,$ all characterized by lack of understanding, to process $\mathbf { R _ { 2 } } ,$ the process by which the theory is understood. We shall discuss the reasons of this change in the next chapter, which will be devoted to the theory of thinking, and there we shall also discuss such accomplishments as those of Köhler's chimpanzees, which in some respects are similar to our last example, also taken from Köhler (1930, p. 57). (c) TRANsFoRMATION BY EFFECT. At the moment we must point out a third class of cases, those where the process is transformed during its own progress by its cffect. The puzzle box experiments introduced by Thorndike may serve as our example. In these experiments an animal by continued repetition learns to eliminate useless movements and to perform the “proper" one, i.e., that which will lead it to the lure. The question thcn is, what are the causes that transform its behaviour. The famous laws of frcquency, recency and effect were formulated to answer this qucstion. All three laws in their application to this problcm have of late years been discussed so often that I can omit the various argumcnts here, the more so since I have trcated this matter fully in my earlier book (1928, Chapter IV). Here I shall confine myself to a positive theory. Why does a cat in a cage, which originally manifests an extremely varied behaviour, eventually linit its activity to the turning of a latch or the pressing of a button? The quesiion can be answered only in terms of process, not in terms of accomplishment. The fact that $\mathbf { R _ { 1 } } _ { 1 }$ $\mathbb { R } _ { 2 } \ldots .$ are dropped while process $\bar { \mathsf { R } } _ { \mathfrak { w } } \bar { \mathsf { e } } . \mathsf { g } .$ the pressing of a button, is preserved and perfccted, must be explained as a transformation of process. We recall our discussion of maze-running (pp. 539 f.) and distinguish in conformity with it the accomplishment of pressing the button, $\mathbf { A } _ { \mathbf { n } } ,$ and the process of doing so, $\mathbf { \dot { P } _ { n } ^ { ' } } . \mathbf { A _ { n } }$ can be achieved by many $\mathbb { P } _ { \mathtt { N } }$ for instance, by stepping on the button accidentally while moving to another place within the cage, $\mathbf { P _ { n 1 } }$ . Since it played no part in the process, the button as such can contribute nothing to the proper $\dot { \mathbb { P } } _ { \mathfrak { n } } ,$ the deliberate pressing of the button. But it is possible that $\mathrm { { \cal P } } _ { n 1 }$ , by virtue of leading to success, may become transformed into $\mathbf { l } _ { \mathbf { \Pi } ^ { \mathtt { s } } } ^ { }$ just as in the maze example discussed above the run through a blind alley may, by the fact that the animal fiņds itself blocked, be transformed into a detour. This hypothesis does not imply that such transformation occurs completely on one occasion. It is perfectly within the frame of the hypothesis that the change in the process, or rather in the trace of it (see p. 54o), be no more than a slight shift in the dircction of the trué process; any degree of such a shift, from the merest beginning to a complete reorganization, is perfectly compatible with our theory. ## 552 LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS Thus in one fundamental aspect these cases are like those discussed last—mathematical argument and the intelligent performances of apes—inasmuch as they involve a transformation of process. Their difference lies in the causes which bring about this transformation. For whereas in the former cases all the data necessary for the transformation were presented simultaneously, in the cases now under discussion something new is required which can only be provided by the animal's activity itself, since no animal could from the mere inspection of the puzzle box discover the device for opening its door, whereas potentially an animal should be able to perceive a box in one corner as a tool useful for reaching a lure suspended from the centre of the ceiling. Animals master both kinds of tasks. Historically “trial and error" experiments preceded "insight" experiments, and it is these former which clamour for a law of effect or success. For I am as fully convinced as Thorndike himself that—in these cases—the success of the action performed is responsible for its being learned. I differ from Thorndike only in the interpretation of this effect of success. For Thorndike, success, i.e., the pleasure of obtaining the goal, stamps in a previously existing "connection."In my theory success transforms a process in such a way as to give it a new “meaning," i.e., a new rôle in its total goal-directed activity. In my theory success need not be the only effect to change the trace of a unitary process. Failure may be another, punishment a third, and there is still room for many other varieties of results of actions. ## THE AFTER-EFFECT OF TRACES Thus we have discussed the three aspects of learning and can now take up our two remaining problems, the after-effect of traces in its various forms, and the arousal of a new process in thought, two problems which, as we have seen, are not unrelated to each other. The first problem arises from the preceding discussion when we analyze the term “availability" which we have used so often with reference to traces. Availability means only that the trace, by becoming part of the field of a new process, exerts an influence upon it, the kind of influence exerted remaining as yet undefined. It is this influence which we are to analyze now. Our procedure must be empirical in the sense that we take up one by one a number of such influences as we know from experience, a more systematic approach being excluded by the insufficiency of our knowledge. Acquisition of Skills. We begin with the acquisition of skills. A great amount of experimental work has been done in this field, practice curves have been obtained for a variety of different accomplishments, and their theoretical significance has been discussed. Our problem, however, will be a different one. We accept the fact of improvement by practice. We ask what this improvement can mean in terms of trace-process dynamics. Furthermore we take it for granted that the problem of achievement pertains to this field of learning as to any other. A process cannot be improved by repetition before it has happened, however primitive and crude the first occurrence of the process may appear compared to its later stages. Therefore the problem how the particular process occurs for the first time will also remain outside the scope of the present discussion. That new processes occur again and again during the progress of learning seems to be proved by the transitions in the learning curve from one plateau to another. Our problem is the problem of improvement by practice, reduced to its lowest terms of a relatively simple movement. Why has repetition the effect that it does? In terms of process-trace dynamics this problem has two parts: a certain performance leaves a trace; improvement must be due to the effect of this trace. Therefore two questions arise: (1) How does the new process come into communication with the trace? (2) What effect has the trace on the new process with which it communicates? We shall defer the discussion of the first point, since it enters each and every trace function. What can we say about the second? The general nature of the effect of a trace on a process has been developed before. A trace can influence a process only if it belongs to the field in which the process takes place. We now have to discuss the specific form of this field influence in the acquisition of skill. Previously we have found that a trace field arising from a unitary temporal process exerts its influence on thc continuation of this process by causing certain new part-processes to occur more easily than others (see Chapter X, p. 449), the ones favoured being those which would give good continuation and closure to the whole process. But the acquisition of skills cannot be treated as one unitary process in the same sense in which a melody must be treated as such (see p. 533), and therefore we cannot simply take over this principle from the old case. Instead we must introduce new assumptions: a first hypothesis would be that a trace as part of the field of a process exerts an influence on the process in the direction of making it similar to the process which originally produced the trace. ## 554 LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS FIRST AssUMPTION ABOUT THE EFFECT OF A TRACE. We have encountered an example of such an influence at the end of the last chapter (pp. 5o6 f.), the face taking the place of a chaos of lines which will ever afterwards be seen as a face. This case illustrates our hypothesis very well: a stimulus constellation which can give rise to several perceptual organizations calls out one of them only as soon as this one has occurred and left a trace. Ambiguity of the stimulus pattern with regard to the ensuing process of organization means that the actually occurring process is not caused by the stimulus forces alone; other forces, extraneous to the stimulus pattern, must have tipped the scales in favour of the actual process. A trace of a similar process, this we infer from our example, can be such a force; when it is, it has exerted the influence formulated in our first hypothesis. THe PrINCIPLE OF ActION AND REaCTION APPLIED To THe TraCE-Process RELAtioN. We shall meet with other manifestations of this influence later. Now we shall try to explain it. Must we introduce this hypothesis as a ncw assumption to explain a number of different effects, or is it possible to derive it from a more fundamental principle inherent in our system? We shall attcmpt the latter course. If a process occurs in a field, it is influenced by that field; but because of the law of action and reaction the field must also be influenced by the process. Consequently, when a trace forms part of the field of a process, it will be affected by the occurrence of the process, a possibility which we have previously discussed (see p. 524).ª If now the trace is stable, it will resist change and will therefore determine the new process in such a way that it will not induce such a change. This is achieved when the new proccss is similar to the one which originally produced the trace. If this argument is right, our first hypothesis about the influence exerted by a trace on a process has been derived from a far more gencral principle, the principle of mutual interdependence of old trace and new process, which will help us to explain a number of other trace influences as well and which, as a mátter of fact, we introduced some time ago in our explanation of the arousal of melodies (Chapter X, p. 449). THIs PRINCIPLE APPLIED To IMPROVEMENT BY REPETITION. Now at last we can raise the question whether our first hypothesis explains the gradual acquisition of skills. And we see at once that it does not. It will explain the relative persistence of a skill, new movements being performed with a fairly high degree of perfection even after long periods of disuse, for here the new process more or less approximates the old ones. But the hypothesis does not yet explain why consecutive pcrformances become increasingly better. The hypothesis as it stands explains recurrence of a process, but not improvcment. However, with the help of the more general printiple of the interaction of trace and process we can approach this problem also. Above we assumed that the trace which formed part of the field of a process was in itself stable. Under this condition it would have the eflect of making the new process as similar to the original one as possible. But if the trace is not stable? Then it is under stress towards stability, as we have seen in the last chapter. And therefore its field influence will be such as to produce a process which in its turn will react on the trace so as to make it more stable. In this case, then, the trace would not favour a mere recurrence of the old process to which it owes its existence, but rather the occurrence of a more stable process. In other words such a trace would lead to improvement. The rôle of repetition for the acquisition of skills would be explained if we could apply this conclusion to this function. This would mean that we assumed the traces of the first processes to be highly unstable, an assumption which on the face of it seems very plausible. It would have two consequences, both subject to expcrimental testing. On the one hand a highly unstable trace has, as we have seen (Chapter XI, p. 507) a low survival value.ª Therefore we should expect that repetition will have no effect if the single performances are spaced too far apart. This certainly seems true and is in striking contrast to the fact just mentioned that an acquired skill will not be lost after a long period of disuse. The low survival value of an unstable trace is opposed to the high survival value of a stable trace systcm. On the other hand an unstable trace, before it disintegrates, will tend to change in the direction 'of greater stability. The acquisition of skills seems to show features well compatible with such an assumption, although Hunter's excellent review of the experiments on learning contains no reference to any experimental work done to establish this point. I mean a sort of "latent" learning, the fact that the performance after an interval of rest is often better than at any previous learning period. If this effect which many people will probably confirm from their own ## 556 LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS experience is found to be a true fact," it would indicate that the traces have changed during the rest period in such a way as to produce better performances, and that means, in the terms of our theory, in the direction of greater stability. This assumption would also explain one of the best established facts of learning, viz., the advantage of distributing the repetitions over a long period of time as compared to their accumulation in a few blocks. All this is hypothesis, but an hypothesis which really explains the acquisition of skills. No doubt it is an abstraction inasmuch as virtually no skill is' so simple that it is improved by progress in one direction only. As a rule the process will have to vary in a number of different directions before it becomes perfect, and not all of these directions may be present in the first performances. In other words new achievements, in the sense of our definition, may occur at various stages of the learning process and thereby complicate the picture enormously. Moreover such new achievemcnts may be made possible by prcvious developments of the processes. In short, on purely theoretical grounds we cannot expect the learning curve to be simple, and that the less since the learning curve represents merely one or a few manifestations of learning which in many, if not in most or all cases, reflect but a part of the actual learning achieved. Associative Learning. THE DocTRINE OF AssocIATIoNIsm. The next function of memory to be discussed is so-called associative learning in its various aspects. Associationism has in the course of history meant a number of diferent things, but since the end of the last century it has become a very definite and essentially simple doctrine which tries to explain every acquisition by experience in terms of newly formed associations, i.e., connections between independent units by virtue of which one of them is capable of reproducing the other. Association, in this theory, is the cause of reproduction, although formerly the term association was used indiscriminately for cause and effect, the item reproduced through association being called an association as well as the bond which was thought to have caused its reappearance. To avoid misunderstandings we shall reserve the term association for the cause, the connection established by expericnce, and use the term reproduction for the effect, i.e., the item produced by the bond, and the working of the bond. In this sense association in the form of the strict traditional theory means a bond between two or more items, established by mere spatial or temporal contiguity of these items, therefore the same in kind for all items, i.e., independent of their nature. How little such a concept is compatible with the principles of physical science has been duly emphasized by Köhler in a passage which we have previously quoted (see p. 167). Nevertheless, that it was thc true concept of association dominating the theorizing and experimenting of psychologists for at least fifty years is proven by the method of their experimentation. No innovation in psychology is praised more highly, no single event in the history of psychology valued beyond Ebbinghaus's invention of nonsense syllables for the investigation of memory. Now I am far from minimizing this achievement of this highly original and active psychologist who gave us a new tool with which to work experimentally on problems which before had been the domain of uncontrolled everyday observation and pure speculation. But I want to point out that Ebbinghaus's method presupposed a very definite thcory of learning, viz., the theory of association as I have just presented it. Any investigation of learning must usc material which is not yet learned at the time of the experiment. This is a truism. So we might begin to learn long poems or pieces of prose, and Ebbinghaus himself did just that. Why then did he also begin to learn nonsense syllables, a painful achievement with no gain to one's knowledge? The reason is simple under the associationistic assumptions: since all learning consists in the formation of associations it can best be studied with material which is entirely unassociated when learning begins. Words, which form the elcments of poetry and prose, have entered into innumerable associations before the learning of the particular text begins and therefore such learning is not learning from scratch but learning partly supported, partly inhibited, by an uncontrollable mass of pre-existing associations. Only meaningless new material should therefore be used when one wants to control all effective factors. This argument, however, is conclusive only if the processes of learning meaningful and meaningless material are identical in kind, diffcrent only in degree of complexity. Only if every connection bctween several items is of one and the same kind, viz., association, one kind of material can be selected to study the laws operative in learning of cvery kind of material. Therefore the difference between the two sequences: Pud sol dap rus mik nom and A thing of beauty is a joy for ever, does not lie in the kind of connection existing between the different members of each series, but only in the complexity of the associative pattern. In the second there are many associations in existence when the line is being learned, some of which need only be strengthened by the learning process, like “a thing," "of beauty," "is a," “a joy" or even “is a joy," "for ever," while the first pattern has to be built up entirely during the learning process. On the other hand, the terms of the second series must have incurred previous associations which inhibit or obstruct the forming of new ones according to the law of associative inhibition which says: if an item A has been associated with an item B it will be more difficult to associate it with an item C than if it had not been previously associated with B. Thus “a" has been connected with innumerable other words, so has "is," "for," "beauty." Since no such inhibition exists for the terms of the first series, it is not easy for association theory to explain why the second line is learned and retained so much more easily than the first, a difficulty which, as far as I know, was never explicitly mentioned by the associationists. In order to complete this side of the picture we need only add that associations are also formed between terms not following upon each other directly, c.g., bctween pud and dap in the first series, their strength depending not only upon the proximity of the terms but also upon their position within the series. The same is of course true of the second series, so that in each product of learning we have a complicated set of associations of various strength, in both mcaningful and meaningless material, The association thcory can at best ascribe to these associations, their facilitating and inhıbiting effects, definite quantitative values after the learning effect has been established—and even that has never really been attempted—but it cannot predict bcfore the event which will be strong, which weak; this is only another way of saying that it cannot really explain the difference between the learning of meaningless and meaningful material, if one means by explanation the deduction from previously established principles. Association, then, has meant something much more specific than "the establishment of functional relations among psychological activities and states in the course of individual experience," a definition which Robinson (p. 7) introduces.º Association has mcant one kind of functional relationship, produced by mcrc contiguity and independent of the properties of the terms. It is, to use a German term, entircly “sachfremd," i.e., external, adventitious, contingent. But there is still another side to associationism. In considering association as the cause of reproduction one considers it as a force, a force which starts a new process. The fact that A and B have become associated not only makes it possible for B to appear when A has been reinstated, it would even make it necessary if there were no other forces operative at the moment. Since, however, at any one moment numberless associations are operating, the association A B is only one component in the complex interplay of forces, the additive resultant of which will determine the result. AssoCIATIONIsM AND THE WürzBURG ScHoOL. It was here that the first reaction against associationism set in. It seemed incredible that this resultant should so often lie in the direction of an ordered and purposive sequence of ideas or train of thoughts. Although, as we have seen, it was quite impossible to predict the strength and number of the individual associations operating at a given time, it was in many cases perfectly possible to predict the results, i.e., the actual course which the train of thought will take. We recall merely the experiments on the learning of a new relation reported in Chapter XI (pp. 5o9 f.). How can we predict that a person instructed to name the opposite will answer "bad" to the word "good," and not “man" or "boy," or "is," or "better," or "hope," although we have not the faintest idea of the relative strength of these different associations? The clear recognition of this difficulty by Oswald Kulpe gave rise to the work of the Würzburg school which about thirty years ago began to shock the psychological world and destroyed many a bond of personal allegiance and loyalty. Unfortunately the solution which this school proposed for the difficulty it had discerned was not tenable, and so it happened that its real discovery, the insufficiency of associationism, was buried together with its positive contribution. The Würzburg school found itself in the same predicament as the Graz school and shared its fate; psychologists were equally ungrateful to both. The Graz school, following up the ideas of von Ehrenfels, found that no sensation theory could explain shapes, and therefore they added to the concept of sensation, which they left untouched, the concept of a higher mental function “production" and of its product the "Gestaltqualität," the "produced idea," the "idea of extrasensory origin." Similarly the Wurzburg school found the concept of association insufficient to explain the orderly and purposive nature of our thinking, and so they added to it, without modifying it, the concept of a new forcc, the "letermining tendency," which was defined in terms of its effects, just as the process of production was by the Graz school. Both concepts were intro- ## 560 LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS duced to explain order, order imposed upon material which by itself lacked order; in each case a new force appeared as a deus ex machina, introducing a profound dualism into psychology, a dualism between blind mechanical and ordered mental forces. In short, both solutions were vitalistic, and for that reason both are equally unacceptable to us. As a matter of fact the introduction of the determining tendency left the scheme of associationism in one sense intact. The principle of the resultant force as the strongest by mere algebraic addition was retained in the system for a long time, till Selz recognized its inadequacy.º The determining tendency entered this scheme solely as a new force, non-associative in origin, to be added to the multitudinous associative forces, strengthening those bonds which would lead in its direction. It was therefore only consistent with the general principle when Ach conceived the idea of bringing an association and a determining force into conflict and thereby measuring the strength of the latter by the strength of the former, which he regarded as measurable. If the combination "good fellow" has been very strongly associated, thcn it should occur that a person instructed to respond with the opposite replies to the “stimulus word" “good" by saying "fellow" instead of saying "bad." Ach, working not with such meaningful matcrial but with nonsense syllables, made many experiments which he interpreted as supporting his view. We shal discuss them later when we develop a positive theory. They were mentioned here chiefly to show the nature of the Würzburg principles: the conservation of the associative forces, and the additive character of the combination of association and determination. THEoRY oF RoTE LEARNING. After this brief historical survey, which acquainted us with the oldest and most hallowed of all psychological theories, let us approach our problem systematically. The association principle was supposed to hāve universal application. In our systematic procedure we must start from a definite case, and since rote learning has played such a large part in the experimentation of the associationists, we shall choose it as our starting point. What is the effect of rote learning? In the first place: that we can, when we so desire, reproduce, i.e., recite, the material learned by heart; that we can continue the sequence when somebody else starts it, a test which in the case of series of nonsense syllables takes the form of the method of paired associates, in which one member of the series is repeated to the learner and he has to reproduce the next one. There are other effects of rote learning, notably that we recognize the material, an effect which will be discussed later when we discuss the problem of recognition, and besides that many more which we shall neglect, since they do not directly concern the problem of association as manifested by our material. A DISCREPANCY BETWEEN FACT AND ASSOCIATION THEORY. Let us then say that a person has learned a series composed of twelve nonsense syllables. He encounters one of these syllables again; what will happen? According to the association theory this syllable should at once reproduce the one that followed or preceded it, unless other associations were stronger at the moment. Such other associations would have to originate in other data encountered simultaneously with the syllable, since the strongest association which the syllable has formed connects it with either of those two other syllables. If, therefore, other data are removed, as far as that is possible, the above result should inevitably follow. But this is not the case, as special experiments by Lewin have proved (1922, I, pp. 227 f.). Syllables which had been learned by 3oo repetitions and which, if tested by the method of paired associates, would yield correct responses with short reaction times, failed to call up anything if presented under a neutral instruction, according to which the subject was to read the syllable presented in the exposure apparatus but to refrain from any active attempt at reproduction. This result, not derivable from the law of association as usually formulated, can mean two things in terms of our theory. Since reproduction of the following (or any other learned) syllable would mean that the trace system of the learned series had come into communication with the newly perceived syllable, forming part of the field in which this perceptual process occurred, failure to reproduce must mean either that no such communication took place or that the trace field, even when it is in communication with the process, is not capable of producing the process of naming, or thinking of, another syllable. Thus the fact of reproduction raises at once the problem of the communication of the new process with an old trace or trace system. Without such communication the old experience can have no pos. sible bearing upon the new process, a point clearly discerned by Höffding (1889-90), but practically forgotten since then, until Köhler took it up again in his paper read before the International Congress of Psychology at Copenhagen in 1932. TWO POSSIBLE EXPLANATIONS oF THIS FACT. The rcsult of the Lewin experiment, if it could be interpreted as due to a failure of the new ## 562 LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS process to communicate with the old trace, would mean that such communication presupposed, at least in the case of nonsense syllables, a definite Ego attitude: when the subjects were instructed to name the following syllable, they could do so with great facility, whereas this syllable did not emerge when, owing to the instruction, they had no wish or attitude of reproducing. This conclusion depends, of course, on the truth of our interpretation. Fortunately Lewin's account of his experiment contains some extra evidence which makes it at least very plausible. For reproduction is not the only effect whick a trace system has upon a process with which it communicates: there is the more primitive effect of recognition, which, whatever its dynamics, presupposes some such communication. Therefore, if the syllables had been recognized and yet led to no reproduction, our interpretation would be wrong; while, on the other hand, a lack of recognition accompanied by failure to reproduce, would greatly increase its probability. As a matter of fact, in Lewin's experiments the second alternative was realized; the syllables that failed to have a reproductive cffect also failed to be recognized. Therefore it seems farly safe to assume that they did not come into communication with the old traces. So our conclusion about the effect of Ego-attitudes upon such communication would be justified. But this does not mean that the second of the two alternatives enumerated above is excluded, namely, that traces, though in communication with a present process, do not lead to reproduction. The result of Lewin's experiment, if interpreted in my way, says nothing about the effect that a trace system exerts upon a process with which it is in communication. It may or it may not be ċapable of enforcing reproduction by its mere communication, without any special force like an Ego-attitudc. While working in the famous laboratory of the University of Wúrzburg as early as 19o9, I made some experiments which throw some light on this question (1912). They were similar to Lewin's experiments in using practically the same instruction; they differed from them in being à modification of the old type of association expcriment rather than a modification of the paired-associate memory experiments. I called out a word to my subjects, who were instructed to listen and passively wait for anything that might come to thcir consciousness. The results corresponded perfectly to Lewin's. The passive attitude proved to be very unstable, tending to be quickly replaced by a definite active attitude, often unknown to the subject. But before such an attitude developed my subjects were as much at sea as Lewin's: nothing would come to their minds, and the experience of passive waiting was distinctly painful. In all these respects the two sets of experiments are in exact correspondence. But dynamically there is this difference between them: the words that my subjects were presented with were understood by them, i.e., they did communicate with older trace systems. The failure to reproduce anything in my experiments can therefore not be explained by lack of communication. Here a trace field existed, and yet its influence alone was not sufficient to start a process of reproduction, whereas reproductions of various kinds occurred with great ease as soón as "latent attitudes" had developed. The second alternative may thus be a very real one. There exist conditions under which a trace field in communication with a process is not capable of influencing this process in the sense of reproduction. That much we can deduce from my old experiments, but no morc. At least to me it would seem premature to generalize that under no conditions can a trace ficld have this effect. THE RÔLE OF THE TRACE IN REPRODUCTION. Before we follOW up the two problems raised in the preceding discussion, viz., the causes which make a process communicate with a trace and the rôle which special attitudes play in reproduction, we shall trcat a third one, corresponding to the problem discussed in the section on motor skill: What is the function of a trace in those cases where reproduction occurs? We hear "to be or" and we continue “not to be"; we want to recite a poem that we have learned, and we do it; we are presented with a syllable from a previously well learned series and instructed to name the one that followed upon it, and we produce the right answer. In the last two cases our intention is without a doubt among the causes of the respective processes, the recitation and the naming of the syllable; in the first case, it is not so easy to establish the existence of a similar attitude. But in all three cases the present performance would be impossible without traces from carlier ones. Therefore we accept it as a fact that these traces are in communication with the processes, and we grant that these processes are set in motion by causes extcrnal to the traces (intentions, attitudes). Even so, the trace has a very definite influence on the process. Of what kind is this influencc? Can we derive it from the gencral law formulated on pages 554 f., viz., that a trace will influence a process in such a way that the reactive influence exerted by the process on the trace will not diminish. but if possible increase, the latter's stability? We can, as soon as we envisage the traces as products of organization and not, as associationistic psychology was accustomed to $\mathbf { d o } ,$ as a number of separate items merely joined or coupled together by some bond. That we must treat traces as organized products of organized processes has been demonstrated in the last two chapters; it is therefore no new hypothesis introduced in order to explain reproduction. Rote Learning a Process of Organization. We shall now apply this principle to our present case: In what sense is a series of nonsense syllables organized? We have seen in the historical introduction to this section that this material was chosen just because it seemed to fit thc associationistic assumptions: a number of unconnected items. And judged by accomplishment the learning of such material seemed good proof of these assumptions. But accomplishment of so crude a kind gives us no knowledge of the processes which made it possible, a point stressed sufficiently in our previous discussions. Variation of experimental procedure has instead produced ample proof that the performance which leads to the learning of a nonsense series is a process of organization. Thus it is impossible to learn a series of ten nonsense syllables without some rhythmization; as a rule these series are learned in trochaic rhythm, so that they become organized into five pairs which form real parts of the whole series, just as each syllable of a pair is a real part of it. This formation of pairs is a fact of true organization, and not explicable in terms of mere association. A purely associationistic explanation of this fact would have to explain the formation of pairs like this: the members of a pair are more closely associated with each other than either of them with its other neighbour; $\mathbf { i . e . , }$ the associations (all in a forward direction) between an odd and an even member are stronger than those between an even and an odd one. For example, in a series: a $\boldsymbol { b } / c d / e f / , c$ is more strongly associated with $\pmb { d }$ than with $\delta ,$ or than d with e. That this explanation of the pair character is wrong has been proved by very ingenious and elaborate experiments by Witasek, posthumously published by Auguste Fischer. Only one of the many experiments will be reported here. Witasek's Experiments. On one day the subject learned four preliminary series of ten nonsense syllables, symbolized thus: $$
