Of Bicycles, Bakelites, and Bulbs Toward a Theory of Sociotechnical Change Of Bicycles, Bakelites, and Bulbs Toward a Theory of Sociotechnical Change Wiebe E. Bijker Of Bicycles, Bakelites, and Bulbs integrates three fascinating case studies with sociological and political analyses to offer an integrated theory both of the relations between technology and society and of the issues involved in sociotechnical change. The stories of the safety bicycle, the first truly synthetic plastic, and the fluorescent light bulb reflect a cross-section of time periods, engineering and scientific disciplines, and economic, social, and political cultures. Bijker’s approach is to use these case studies to suggest concepts that serve as building blocks in a more and more inclusive theory— one that uncovers the social roots of technology and thereby makes it amenable to democratic politics. “Bijker has provided a useful text demonstrating the advantages of opening up technological phenomena to relativist inquiry . . . a valuable contribution to the important goal of redefining the relation between the technical and the nontechnical.' —Steve Woolgar, New Scientist Wiebe E. Bijker is Professor of Technology and Society, University of Limburg, Maastricht, The Netherlands. Inside Technology series ycles, Bakelites, and Bulbs a Theory of Sociotechnical Change Wiebe E. Bijker ©1995 Massachusetts Institute of Technology All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any electronic or mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or information storage and retrieval) without permission in writing from the publisher. This book was set in Baskerville by Asco Trade Typesetting Ltd., Hong Kong and was printed and bound in the United States of America. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Bijker, Wiebe E. Of bicycles, bakelites, and bulbs : toward a theory of sociotechnical change / Wiebe E. Bijker. p. cm.—(Inside technology) Includes bibliographical references (p. ) and index. ISBN 0-262-02376-8 (H), 0-262-52227-6 (P) 1. Technology—Social aspects. I. Title.II. Series. T14.B541995 306.4'6—dc20 94-44413 94-44413 CIP Of Bicycles, Bakelites, and Bulbs ## Inside Technology edited byWiebe E. Bijker, W. Bernard Carlson, and Trevor Pinch Wiebe E. Bijker, Of Bicycles, Bakelites, and Bulbs: Toward a Theory of Sociotechnical Change Wiebe E. Bijker andJohn Law, editors, Shaping Technology/Building Society: Studies in Sociotechnical Change Stuart S. Blume, Insight and Industry: On the Dynamics of Technological Change in Medicine Geoffrey C.Bowker, Science on the Run: Information Management and Industrial Geophysics atSchlumberger, 1920–1940 H. M. Collins, Artificial Experts: Social Knowledge and Intelligent Machines Pamela E. Mack, Viewing the Earth: The Sorial Construction of the Landsat Satellite System Donald MacKenzie, Inventing Accuracy: A Historical Sociology of Nuclear Missile Guidance For Tonny # Acknowledgments One of the central themes ofthis book,the interlaced characterof hitherto separate domains such as technology and society, equally applies to its own evolution. This book developed from an academic detour, as described in the first chapter. But in addition to this intellectual origin, its social roots were equally important,and these lie first inclose work with many friendsand colleagues. At the University ofTwente, the late PeterBoskma,Ellenvan Oost, and Jürgen Bönig were my closest collaborators. Without them, this research would never have been started in the first place. A crucial influencewas Trevor Pinch's semester as a visiting researcher; his friendship and scholarshiphave changed my professional life irreversibly. During this period we organized the"Twente1"and"Twente 2"workshops, which turned out to be seminal in shaping the sociology of technology field. Editing the volumes that emerged from these workshops with Tom Hughes and John Law was an exciting experience. These books contained brief versions of the bicycle, Bakelite, andfluorescent lighting case studies, and thecomments from Henk van denBelt, Robert Bud, Michel Callon, David Edge, Robert Frost, Ernst Homburg, Stephen Kline, Rachel Laudan, Donald MacKenzie,Simone Novaes, Jeffrey Sturchio,Sharon Traweek, and Steve Woolgarwere much appreciated. Boelie Elzen,Frans-Bauke van der Meer, Arie Rip, Wim Smit, and Gerard de Vries offered valuable help in turning thefirst stage of the project into a dissertation. Later, at the University of Limburg in Maastricht, the project benefited from further interweaving ofteachingand research. The preparation of coursestogether with KarinBijsterveldand GerWackers, as well as teaching various classes abroad, contributed much to my own understanding of the issues discussed in this book (and I can only hope that it had the same effect on students). I also benefited from discussions with research groups in various places. Chapter 4 was largely written during my stay as visiting professor at the Technical University in Vienna. Chapter 5 received its penultimate and most radical revision during my visit to the Technical University of Denmark. The research group"Technological Culture"in Maastricht provided an important forum for discussing drafts of chapters 4and 5. Tannelie Blom, Ton Nijhuis, Rein de Wilde (Maastricht), Rob Hagendijk(Amsterdam), Ulrik Jörgensen (Copenhagen), and Eduardo Aibar (Barcelona) have tried to help me avoid various pitfalls in the discussions of powerin these last chapters (though I probably still fell into a good number of them). Ed Constant, Tom Misa, and Paul Rosen have provided stimulating discussion at various stages of writing. Making a book, however, is not just a matter of academic research and teaching. In the final stage, the comments oftwo anonymous referees were stimulating and challenging. Bernie Carlson, Larry Cohen, and Trevor Pinch succeeded in critically following and shaping the project without jeopardizing our relationship as co-editors of the Inside Technology series. Melissa Vaughn did the crucial editing and production job of turning the manuscript into a book. Such were the professional ties, many of which have turned into friendships. But the last—and in some respects most important—part of the weave has yet to be mentioned. This book could never have been written solely within the confines of academia. Liselotte, Else, and Sanne continually reminded me of this in their need for cooking and caring, and their claims to bicycle and football, to playing piano and cello. But mainly by just being there, three daughters provide a strong, continuous demonstration that life is more, and more complex, and more interesting, than the activities in the academic compartment of society. This book is dedicated to Tonny,who complements all those mentioned above as skeptical commentator, as supportive friend, as mother of the daughters, as love. ## Contents Acknowledgmentsix 1   
