# The Greek point of view in both art and chronology has little in common with ours but was much like that of the Middle Ages. White's view is that although some attributes of perspective occur in antiquity, there was not much interest in them as such. In the Renaissance it became recognized technique that perspective called for a fixed point of view. Such a stress on private stance, while common to a print culture, simply did not concern a manuscript culture. The dynamics of individualism and nationalism were merely latent in the scribal mode. For in the highly tactile product of the scribe the reader found no means for splitting off the visual from the audile-tactile complex, such as the sixteenth and seventeenth century reader did. A great deal of what is said by Bernard van Groningen in his study of the Greek time sense, In the Grip of the Past, is useful in understanding the effects of visual bias as they concern the time sense. As might be expected, the new Greek sense of chronological order and a oneway movement of events was an overlay on the older mythical and cosmic idea of simultaneous time, which is common to all non-literate communities. Van Groningen observes (p. 17): "The Greeks often refer to the past and by doing so, they bind the matter in question to a chronological conception. But as soon as we inquire after the real meaning, it becomes obvious that the idea is not temporal but is used in general sense." This is, in respect to time, like having foreshortening without a fixed point of view or vanishing point. And that, indeed, was the Greek stage of visual abstraction. Somewhat in the same way, van Groningen argues, Herodotus having "freed himself from myth and mythical speculations," made a gesture "to use the past as an explanation of the present, or at any rate, of a later phase in the development." (p. 26) This visualizing of chronological sequences is unknown to oral societies, as it is now irrelevant in the electric age of information movement. The "narrative line" in a literature is immediately revealing in the same way as the painterly or sculptural line. It tells exactly how far the dissociation of the visual from the other senses has proceeded. Erich Auerbach¹4 confirms in literature all aspects of the Greek development as it has appeared thus far in the other arts. Thus Homer's Achilles and Odysseus are presented in flat vertical planes by “fully externalized description, uniform illumination, uninterrupted connection, free expression, all events in the foreground, displaying unmistakable meanings, few elements of historical development and of psychological perspective . . ." The visual makes for the explicit, the uniform, and the sequential in painting, in poetry, in logic, history. The non-literate modes are implicit, simultaneous, and discontinuous, whether in the primitive past or the electronic present, which Joyce called “eins within a space." Van Groningen relates the new visual and sequential idea of chronology with "the awakening of the scientific sense in Greece," which, it is true, tries to observe the facts with accuracy, but wishes even more to know the explanation and looks for it in preceding causes. This visual notion of “causality" found its extreme expression in Newtonian physics. Sir Edmund Whittaker writes in Space and Spirit (p. 86) : Newtonianism, like Aristotelianism, attempts to understand the world by tracing the connection of events with one another; and this is effected by ordering our experiences according to the category of cause and effect, discovering for every phenomenon its determining agents or antecedents The affirmation that this connection is all-embracing, that no event happens without a cause, is the postulate of causality. The extreme visual bias of this notion of cause obtrudes very incongruously in an electric and simultaneous world. Sir Edmund adds (p. 87), by way of contrast: Thus, the notion of force tended to become replaced by the notions of interaction and of the energy possessed by the aggregate of a set of particles; and instead of considering single bodies under the influence of forces, the mathematical physicists developed theories such as that of Lagrange in dynamics, in which mathematical equations are obtained capable of predicting the future of a whole system of bodies simultaneously, without bringing in the ideas of “force" or “cause" at all. . . . The pre-Socratic or pre-literate philosophers like the post-literate scientists of our day have only to listen to the inner resonance of a problem in order to derive it and the universe from water or fire or some single “worldfunction." That is, the speculators of our time can as easily fall unawares into the auditory bias of “field" theory as the Greeks leapt into the flatland of abstract visuality and one-way lineality. The Greeks, says van Groningen (pp. 36–7), eagerly sought the past: Odysseus is nowhere the adventurer who, drawn by the unknown, likes to go farther and farther, who is charmed by the coming events, and urged on by the mysteries of the future to ever receding regions. Quite the contrary. He only wants to go back; the past fascinates him; he wants restoration of the things of the past, he travels by compulsion, driven along by Poseidon's wrath, Poseidon the god of the strange and unknown land which attracts the adventurers but terrifies Odysseus. This endless wandering to him means adversity and misfortune; the return, happiness and peace. The mysterious future strikes agony into his heart; he has to steel himself against it; but he feels safe with the past, with the known. The idea of the past, discovered by means of the new visual chronology as an area of peace in a distant perspective was, indeed, a novelty. It would have been impossible save by phonetic literacy, and it is a vision which is quite difficult for us to imagine today as ever being accessible again. Van Groningen's analysis of the reasons for the Greek obsession with the past, as scientific and as psychological security, helps to explain the natural literary bias of all humanist ages in favour of ruins. For nowhere does the past speak so eloquently to the solitary musings of the scholar as from the midst of ruins. There is another feature of the time which bridges from the Greek present into the past: "The time discussed is clearly homogeneous. It bears the character of an uninterrupted sequence of occurrences in which everything is in its right place." (p. 95) ## The Greeks invented both their artistic and scientific novelties after the interiorization of the alphabet. The analysis of William Ivins strongly supports van Groningen when the latter writes: "The conception which they have of the future is, of course, only an expected, dreaded or desired parallel to the past." But the visual element in the Greek sensibility was still much embedded in the audiletactile complex, giving to their fifth century, as to the Elizabethan Age, the character of a relatively balanced sensibility.15 That the same limitation of mere visual parallelism affected Greek geometry Ivins points out in his Art and Geometry (pp. 57–8) : When Pappus had finished, the situation was that the late Greek geometers knew two focal ratios, three directrix-focus ratios, and the visual transformation of a circle into an ellipse. They also knew, and these I shall come back to, not only particular cases of the invariance of anharmonic ratios but Euclid's “porism", the latter of which was as close a miss as possible for Desargues' Theorem. But they regarded these things as isolated propositions having no relation to each other. Had the late Greeks only added to them the one further idea that parallel lines meet at infinity, they would have had in their hands at least logical equivalents of the basic ideas for geometrical continuity and for perspective and perspective geometry. That is to say that again and again during a period of six or seven centuries they went right up to the door of modern geometry, but that, inhibited by their tactile-muscular, metrical ideas, they were never able to open that door and pass out into the great open spaces of modern thought. The story of uniformity, continuity, and homogeneity was the new mode in Greek logic as it was in geometry. Jan Lukasieqicz, in Aristotle's Syllogistic stresses: "Syllogistic as conceived by Aristotle requires terms to be homogeneous with respect to their possible positions as subjects and predicates. This seems to be the true reason why singular terms were omitted by Aristotle."(p. 7) And: "This is the greatest defect of the Aristotelian logic, that singular terms and propositions have no place in it. What was the cause?"(p. 6) The cause was the same as in all the Greek seeking of the novelties of visual order and lineal homogeneity. But our analyst has a further note (p. 15) on the inseparable nature of "logic" and the abstract visual faculty: "Modern formal logic strives to attain the greatest possible exactness. This aim can be reached only by means of a precise language built up of stable, visually perceptible signs. Such a language is indispensable for any science." But such a language is made by excluding all but the visual sense even of words. The only concern here is to spot the degree of effect which the alphabet had on its first users. Lineality and homogeneity of parts were “discoveries," or rather changes in the sense life of the Greeks under the new regime of phonetic writing. The Greeks expressed these new modes of visual perception in the arts. The Romans extended lineality and homogeneity into the civic and military spheres, and into the world of the arch and of enclosed or visual space. They did not so much extend the Greek “discoveries" as undergo the same process of detribalization and visualization. They extended lineality into an Empire and homogenization into the mass-processing of citizens, statuary, and books. Today the Roman would be quite at home in the U.S.A. and the Greek by comparison would prefer the “backward" and oral cultures of our world, such as Ireland or the Old South. The kind and degree of literate experience of the Greek was not intense enough to enable him to translate his audile-tactile heritage into the “enclosed" or “pictorial" space that was only widely available to human sensibility after printing. Between the extreme visuality of perspective and the flat planes of Greek and medieval art there is a further degree of abstraction or dissociation of our sense lives which we quite naturally feel to be the difference between the ancient-medieval and the modern worlds. Since new, empathic methods of art and cultural analysis give us easy access to all modalities of human sensibility we are no longer limited to a perspective of past societies. We recreate them. There is entire consistency in the effects of the emergent visual component in every sector of the ancient world. The steady increase of stress on retinal impression from the Greek into the Roman time has been noted by John Hollander in The Untuning of the Sky (p. 7) : But with the exception of oral, pre-literary poetry, added complications to the consideration of poetry as sound arise in the existence and use of written languages. If a poem is to be treated as a highly complex utterance in a spoken language, its written form becomes a simple coding of it, word by word, onto a page. The poem will thus be defined in terms of patterns of sound classes. But starting as early as the first Latin use of Greek meters, literary analysis has been confronted with poems whose written versions, or codings, contain significant individual and conventional elements which do not appear in the original, or aural, versions, and vice versa. To state that both music and poetry are composed of sound, without specifying the degree to which this is true, therefore, becomes misleadingly inadequate. The difficulties of such a reduction have resulted not only in categorical esthetic confusions, but in those which produced the unnecessary conflicts among traditional European prosodic theories since Hellenistic times. The locus classicus of these confusions for our literary history occurred in the equation of what was actually a musical system (Greek meter) to a more graphic prosodic one (Latin quantitative scansion). It seems to be generally true that borrowed foreign literary conventions, as well as revivals and adaptations of past traditions, invade the linguistic structure of poetry at the written level. Any thorough formalistic analysis of the structure of poetry, and of its relation to the language in which it is written, must deal with the written language as a system in itself, as well as with the spoken one. Albert Einstein, in his Short History of Music (p. 20), offers a further vista of these changes towards the visual organization of musical structures in the Middle Ages: The music being purely vocal, the notation dispensed with indications of rhythm; but it possessed an immediate intelligibility that was lacking in the Greek system, since it actually gave a visual representation of the rise and fall of melody. It became the sure foundation on which modern notation was to be built; . . . Einstein extends his vista into the Gutenberg area itself (p. 45): This international influence was made possible by the invention of musicprinting about 1500. This produced as great a revolution in the history of music as book-printing had done in the history of general European culture. A quarter of a century after Gutenberg's first attempts, German and Italian printers produced printed missals. The decisive step—the printing of the notation of measured music from type—was taken by Ottaviano dei Petrucci of Fossombrone . . . at Venice. . . . Venice . . . remained the principal centre for the printing and publishing of polyphonic music. ## The continuity of Greek and medieval art was assured by the bond between caelatura or engraving and illumination. In his Approach to Greek Art (p. 43) Charles Seltman writes: The Greeks had no paper: papyrus was expensive, reserved for documents and unsuitable for drawing. Wax tablets had no permanence. In fact, the surface of the vase was the drawing-paper of the artist. . . . It is significant that from 650 B.C. onwards Athenian potters had already established a big export trade and were sending their products overseas to Aegina, Italy, and the East. Seltman in this passage indicates why the Greeks made so much less of literacy than the Romans with their high organization of paper in production and the book trade. The decline of the papyrus supplies in the later Roman Empire is a regularly assigned cause for the “collapse" of that Empire and its road system. For the Roman road was a paper route in every sense.16 The principal theme of Seltman's Approach to Greek Art is that the major mode of Greek expression was not that of the sculptor but the celator or engraver (p. 12): For more than four centuries men have been instructed that the very best things which the Greeks ever made were of marble, and that is why you may read in a book on Greek art written little more than a score of years ago that "sculpture was in many ways the most characteristic art of Greece; . . . it achieved the highest attainments". Such has been the usual approach to Greek art. The prize must go to sculpture in stone, with which large works cast in bronze were often associated; next came painting, which is now represented mainly by drawings made on the surfaces of ancient vases; third came the so-called “minor arts", under which label were grouped with condescension and convenience the work of die-cutters, gem-engravers, jewellers, and celators (or metalchasers). But does such "classing" in any way correspond with the ideas which the Greeks themselves held about artists and art? It is certain that they had very different views. Even in the distant age of bronze the inhabitants of Greece and the islands held the skilled worker in metal in very high regard. His art was both a mystery and a delight, and he was thought to owe his gifts to supernatural beings around whom many legends grew. There were creatures called Dactyls, smelters of bronze; Curetes and Corybantes, armourers; Cabeiroi, who were skilful smiths; Telchines, gifted workers in gold, silver and bronze who made weapons for gods and the earliest statues; and lastly the mighty Cyclopes forging the bolts of Zeus. All these are vague giants, goblins and godlings— patron saints of the workshop and the forge whom you might do well to appease and some of whose names just meant “Fingers", “Hammer", “Tongs", and “Anvil". Then, by the time that the Homeric epic began to take form, one of these beings seems to have grown in stature until he attained Olympian rank. Embossing, and chasing, and engraving “on gold, silver, bronze, ivory or gems" was the art called in Latin caelatura. It is significant that in our time we should find it natural to observe many ancient productions in Seltman's way: Exciting as are the marbles of the Parthenon and certain sensitive tombstones of Attic work, it is not among such things that the finest art of the fifth century is to be sought. The most admired artists among the Greeks themselves were not the masons, nor even the modellers, casters and finishers of fine bronzes—but the celators. (p. 72) The work of the celator and engraver is much more tactile than visual and corresponds to the new bias of our electric age. But as regards the present book, the argument of Seltman is most relevant, for he traces the art of the celator all the way through Greek and Roman times and through the medieval world in the art of illumination (p. 115) : Painting in this same age was also able to display its excellence especially in the making of miniatures upon glass set against a gold-leaf background. A certain Greek named Bounneris signed one of these (Plate 102a) with portraits of a mother and two children, and another similar work, unsigned (Plate 102g), shows an agreeable male likeness. This is a fine aristocratic art which was to give rise later to the art of illumination on vellum; and it is an art contemporary with the philosopher Plotinus, a man more sensitive to fine art than ever Plato or Aristotle had been. ## The increase of visual stress among the Greeks alienated them from the primitive art that the electronic age now reinvents after interiorizing the unified field of electric all-at-onceness. The prevalence of the art of the celator, in a word, is a cue and a key to the tactile mode of sensibility as it is interwoven with an incipient stage of literacy, whether in Greece, Rome, or in the flat illumination of the Middle Ages. Seltman, like most of his contemporaries, approaches Greek art, not in a perspective, but as a configuration or a mosaic of items in a field. Coexistence and interplay among the figures in the flat field create a multilevelled and multi-sensuous awareness. This mode of approach tends to partake of the character of auditory, inclusive, and unenclosed space, as Georg von Bekesy has shown in his Experiments in Hearing. But it was the method used everywhere, even by Percy Wyndham Lewis, the critical analyst of the return of auditory space to the twentieth century, in his Time and Western Man. And so, Seltman pursues an acoustic field approach, even to the story of the origins of perspective (p. 31): .. . Homer cannot be described as more childish than Aeschylus, but as a different kind of poet; Plato is not called a riper stylist than Thucydides, but a different kind of writer with a different theme; St. Paul's letters are not more decadent than Cicero's, merely different. For the literature of the ancient world this Growth and Decay Formula will not work. Are we justified in applying it to Fine Art? "Well," you may say, "why worry if people have this harmless illusion about Growth and Decay?" But it happens not to be so harmless, because it implies another doctrine. Implicit in the formula is the dogma that earlier Greek artists must have been striving all the while to attain a naturalism, to achieve a life-like imitation that was beyond their powers. Yet, reverting to literary comparison, it is not generally claimed that in dramatic presentation, Aeschylus, to take an example, was struggling to be as true to life as Menander; or Shakespeare as true to life as Shaw. It is even conceivable—rather probable—that Aeschylus would have disapproved of the New Comedy, and Shakespeare of Shaw. Seltman keeps the whole range of Greek interests in simultaneous play, as it were, waiting for the intrusion of a new theme or pressure in the complex configuration. He watches the reduction of the resonant poetic modes to the simple visual lines of prose, and cites the Parthenon sculptures as “the most perfect art-prose work of the Greeks." These representational forms of sculpture he notes (p. 66) as prose because of their “descriptive realism": The fact, however, remains that prose literature and art-prose began to appear among the Greeks at about the same time, and that before the fifth century was out each had produced its masterpiece; the history of Thucydides, and the sculptures of the Parthenon. What cause or causes led to the adoption of descriptive realism in art to the near exclusion of poetic formalism? It is of no use to talk of development or growth, for the Parthenon no more grew out of Olympia than the history of Thucydides out of the dramas of Aeschylus. Rather, it seems that the fifth-century Greeks, having experimented in realistic art, began to find it more to their taste than formal art because they acquired a liking for verisimilitude. ## A nomadic society cannot experience enclosed space. Instead of using Seltman's unique observations about Greek celature as a take-off strip for the medieval manuscript culture, I am going to enlarge the present mosaic of exhibits a little more. Before approaching the five centuries of the Gutenberg galaxy, it will be well to note how profoundly indifferent are non-literate men to visual values in the organization of perception and experience. This indifference is shared by the artist "since Cézanne." A great art historian like Siegfried Giedion has extrapolated the new art approaches to space “since Cézanne" to include “popular culture" and “anonymous history."Art is for him as inclusive an idea as “mimesis" is for Aristotle. He is currently completing a massive work on The Beginnings of Art as a companion to his artistic analysis of all the abstract modes of twentieth-century mechanization. It is necessary to understand the close interrelation between the world and art of the cave man, and the intensely organic interdependence of men in the electric age. Of course, it could be argued that a lyric disposition to applaud the audile-tactile gropings of child and cave art betokens a naive and uncritical obsession with the unconscious modes of an electric or simultaneous culture. But it was a great thrill for many late Romantics to break through suddenly into an "understanding" of primitive art. As Emile Durkheim had insisted, men could not take much more of the fragmentation of work and experience by visual specialization. For the real “abstract" art is that of realism and naturalism based on a separation of the visual faculty from the interplay of the other senses. So-called abstract art is, in fact, the result of much sense interplay with varying dominance of ear and touch. I would suggest that "touch" is not so much a separate sense as the very interplay of the senses. That is why it recedes in significance as the visual faculty is given separate and abstract intensity. In a very interesting section from his forthcoming book on the beginnings of art printed in Explorations in Communication (pp. 71-89), Giedion explains the space awareness of the cave painters: No traces of human dwellings have been found in the interior of the caverns. These were holy places in which, with the aid of magically potent pictures, the sacred rituals could be performed. These caverns possess no space in our meaning of this word, for in them perpetual darkness reigns. The caverns are, spatially speaking, empty. This is well appreciated by anyone who has tried alone to find his way out from one of them. The weak beam of light from his light torch is swallowed up by the absolute darkness around him, while rocky tunnels and crumbling slopes repeat themselves in every direction and re-echo his question: where is the outlet from this labyrinth? ## Light and the Art of the Caverns Nothing is more destructive of the true values of primeval art than the glare of electric light in this realm of eternal night. Flares or small stone lamps burning animal fat, of which examples have been found, permit one to obtain only fragmentary glimpses of the colors and lines of the objects depicted. In such a soft, flickering light these take on an almost magical movement. The engraved lines, and even the colored surfaces, lose their intensity under a strong light and sometimes disappear altogether. Only in this way can the fine veining of the drawings be seen unsmothered by their rough background. Maybe enough has now been said to show that prehistoric man did not associate the caverns with architecture. In his view the caverns simply provided him with places that he could use for his magic arts. He selected these places with the utmost care. A hole in the ground is not enclosed space because, like a triangle or a tepee, it merely exhibits the lines of force. A square does not exhibit the lines of force, but is a translation of such tactile space into visual terms. No such translation occurs before writing. And anyone who takes the trouble to read Emile Durkheim's The Division of Labour can find the reasons why. For until sedentary life permits some specialization of human tasks, there is no specialization of the sense life such as leads to the stepping up of visual intensity. Anthropologists have suggested to me that any kind of carving or sculpture is already an indication of some stress in the visual area. It would seem reasonable, therefore, that nomadic people having very little specialization of tasks or of sense life would never develop rectangular spaces. But by the time they showed some sculpture they would be readying themselves for the further degree of visualization that is carving and writing and square enclosures. Sculpture, now as ever, is the frontier between the spaces of sight and sound. For sculpture is not enclosed space. It modulates space, as does sound. And architecture, too, has this mysterious dimension of the frontier between two worlds of space. Le Corbusier argues that it is best felt at night. It is only partly in the visual mode. E. S. Carpenter's book Eskimo is concerned with the space concepts of the Eskimo, revealing his quite “irrational" or non-visual attitude to spatial forms and orientations: I know of no example of an Aivilik describing space primarily in visual terms. They don't regard space as static, and therefore measurable; hence they have no formal units of spatial measurement, just as they have no uniform divisions of time. The carver is indifferent to the demands of the optical eye, he lets each piece fill its own space, create its own world, without reference to background or anything external to it. . . . In the oral tradition, the myth-teller speaks as many-to-many, not as person-to-person. Speech and song are addressed to all. . . . As poet, myth-teller, carver, the Eskimo conveys anonymous tradition to all. .. . The work of art can be seen or heard equally well from any direction. The multidirectional space orientation, which is acoustic or auditory, causes the Eskimo to be much amused at squirming efforts of visitors to look at pictures “right-side up." Pages from magazines when stuck on igloo ceilings to prevent dripping, often tempt the white visitor to crane his neck to see them. In the same way the Eskimo may start a drawing or carving on one side of a board and continue right over. There is no word for art in their language yet: “Every Aivilik adult is an accomplished ivory carver: carving is a normal, essential requirement, just as writing is with us." Giedion pursues the same spatial themes in Explorations in Communication (p. 84): “As is universally the case in primeval art, the eye of the Ice Age hunter discovers images of the animals he seeks in the structure of the rocks. The French describe this recognition of natural formations as “epouser les contours". A few lines, a little carving, or some color are enough to bring the animal into view." Our rediscovery of a passion for contours is inseparable from the recognition of precise interdependence and function, and of all forms as organic, which is thrust upon us by the electro-magnetic wave technology. That is, the recovery of primitive organic values in art and architecture is the central technological pressure of our time. Yet there are some anthropologists even today who vaguely suppose that non-literate men have Euclidean space perceptions.17 And many more report their primitive data in terms of Euclidean models of organization. So it is scarcely surprising that a J. C. Carothers should be a rare figure. As a psychologist who crossed functional lines into the anthropological area, he was quite unprepared for what he found. What he found is still known to very few people, indeed. If the effects of the written word, in substituting visual for auditory dimensions of experience, were known to Mircea Eliade, for example, would he continue to express the same zeal for the “resacralizing" of human life? ## Primitivism has become the vulgar cliché of much modern art and speculation. It is possible that the entire group influenced by Marinetti and Moholy-Nagy has been beguiled by a misunderstanding of the origins and causes of the profane configuration of life, on one hand, as of the "sacral" configuration, on the other. On the contrary, it is possible that even admitting the merely mechanical operation of technology in “sacralizing" and "desacralizing" human life, that the entire group of “irrationalists" in our century would still elect the “sacral" or auditory mode of organization of experience. For one thing, it is the emergent mode of the electro-magnetic or electronic, as de Chardin stresses. And for many the new, as such, is a mandate from outer space, even when it is a plunge back into non-literate patterns of awareness. Though we see no inherent religious relevance or importance, either in the “sacred" or “profane" as presented by Eliade or any other “irrational" mystic of our time, we would not belittle the merely cultural power of the nonliterate and the literate forms of life to shape the perceptions and biases of the entire human community. The miseries of conflict between the Eastern and Roman churches, for example, are a merely obvious instance of the type of opposition between the oral and the visual cultures, having nothing to do with the Faith. I would ask, however, whether it is not time that we put these "childish things" under some sort of measured restraint so that their perpetual brainwashings of the human community be subjected to some degree of predictable operation. It has been said that the inevitable war is one whose causes have not been discerned. Since there can be no greater contradiction or clash in human cultures than that between those representing the eye and the ear, it is not strange that our metamorphosis into the eye mode of Western man should be only less agonizing than our present shift into the auditory mode of electronic man. But there is enough inner trauma in such change without the auditory cultures and the optical cultures flinging themselves at each other in outer manifestations of sadistic self-righteousness. Mircea Eliade begins his introduction to The Sacred and the Profane as a manifesto announcing the long-delayed recognition of “the Sacred" or of auditory space in our century. He hails (pp. 8–9) Rudolf Otto's Das Heilige (The Sacred) of 1917: “Passing over the rational and speculative side of religion, he concentrated chiefly on its irrational aspect. For Otto had read Luther and had understood what the "living God"meant to a believer. It was not the God of the philosophers—of Erasmus, for example; it was not an idea, an abstract notion, a mere moral allegory. It was a terrible power, manifested in the divine wrath."Eliade then explains his project: "The aim of the following pages is to illustrate and define this opposition between sacred and profane." Sensing that "the modern Occidental experiences a certain uneasiness before many manifestations of the sacred," as when, "for many human beings, the sacred can be manifested in stones or trees," he proposes to show why man “of the archaic societies tends to live as much as possible in the sacred or in close proximity to consecrated objects": Our chief concern in the following pages will be to elucidate this subject to show in what ways religious man attempts to remain as long as possible in a sacred universe, and hence what his total experience of life proves to be in comparison with the experience of the man without religious feeling, of the man who lives, or wishes to live, in a desacralized world. It should be said at once that the completely profane world, the wholly desacralized cosmos, is a recent discovery in the history of the human spirit. It does not devolve upon us to show by what historical processes and as the result of what changes in spiritual attitudes and behavior modern man has desacralized his world and assumed a profane existence. For our purpose it is enough to observe that desacralization pervades the entire experience of the nonreligious man of modern societies and that, in consequence, he finds it increasingly difficult to rediscover the existential dimensions of religious man in the archaic societies. (p. 13) Eliade is under a gross illusion in supposing that modern man “finds it increasingly difficult to rediscover the existential dimensions of religious man in the archaic societies."Modern man, since the electro-magnetic discoveries of more than a century ago, is investing himself with all the dimensions of archaic man plus. The art and scholarship of the past century and more have become a monotonous crescendo of archaic primitivism. Eliade's own work is an extreme popularization of such art and scholarship. But that is not to say that he is factually wrong. Certainly he is right in saying that "the wholly desacralized cosmos is a recent discovery in the history of the human spirit." In fact, the discovery results from the phonetic alphabet and the acceptance of its consequences, especially since Gutenberg. But I question the quality of insight that causes a human voice to quaver and resonate with hebdomadal vehemence when citing the “history of the human spirit." ## The Gutenberg Galaxy is concerned to show why alphabetic man was disposed to desacralize his mode of being. The later section of this book will accept the role declined by Eliade when he says: “It does not devolve upon us to show by what historical processes . . . modern man has desacralized his world and assumed a profane existence."To show by exactly what historical process this was done is the theme of The Gutenberg Galaxy. And having shown the process, we can at least make a conscious and responsible choice concerning whether we elect once more the tribal mode which has such attraction for Eliade: The abyss that divides the two modalities of experience—sacred and profane—will be apparent when we come to describe sacred space and the ritual building of the human habitation, or the varieties of the religious experience of time, or the relations of religious man to nature and the world of tools, or the consecration of human life itself, the sacrality with which man's vital functions (food, sex, work and so on) can be charged. Simply calling to mind what the city or the house, nature, tools, or work have become for modern and nonreligious man will show with the utmost vividness all that distinguishes such a man from a man belonging to any archaic society, or even from a peasant of Christian Europe. For modern consciousness, a physiological act—eating, sex and so on—is in some only an organic phenomenon, . .. But for the primitive, such an act is never simply physiological; it is, or can become, a sacrament, that is, a communion with the sacred. The reader will very soon realize that sacred and profane are two modes of being in the world, two existential situations assumed by man in the course of his history. These modes of being in the world are not of concern only to the history of religions or to sociology; they are not the object only of historical, sociological, or ethnological study. In the last analysis, the sacred and profane modes of being depend upon the different positions that man has conquered in the cosmos; hence they are of concern both to the philosopher and to anyone seeking to discover the possible dimensions of human existence. (pp. 14–15) Any oral man is preferred by Eliade to the desacralized or literate man; even “a peasant of Christian Europe" retains some of the old auditory resonance and aura of sacral man, as the Romantics insisted more than two hundred years ago. So long as a culture is non-literate, it has for Eliade the indispensable sacral ingredients (p. 17): It is obvious, for example, that the symbolisms and cults of Mother Earth, of human and agricultural fertility, of the sacrality of woman, and the like, could not develop and constitute a complex religious system except through the discovery of agriculture; it is equally obvious that a preagricultural society, devoted to hunting, could not feel the sacrality of Mother Earth in the same way or with the same intensity. Hence there are differences in religious experience explained by differences in economy, culture, and social organization—in short, by history. Nevertheless, between the nomadic hunters and the sedentary cultivators there is a similarity in behavior that seems to us infinitely more important than their differences: both live in a sacralized cosmos, both share in a cosmic sacrality manifested equally in the animal world and in the vegetable world. We need only compare their existential situations with that of a man of the modern societies living in a desacralized cosmos, and we shall immediately be aware of all that separates him from them. We have already seen that sedentary or specialized man, as opposed to nomadic man, is on the way to discovery of the visual mode of human experience. But as long as homo sedens avoids the more potent kinds of optical conditioning, as found in literacy, the mere shades of sacral life, as between nomadic and sedentary man, do not faze Eliade. That Eliade chooses to call the oral man “religious" is, of course, as fanciful and arbitrary as calling blondes bestial. But it is not in the least confusing to those who understand that the “religious" for Eliade is, as he insists from the start, the irrational. He is in that very large company of literacy victims who have acquiesced in supposing that the "rational" is the explicitly lineal, sequential, visual. That is, he prefers to appear as an eighteenth-century mind in rebellion against the dominant visual mode which then was new. Such was Blake and a host of others. Today Blake would be violently anti-Blake, because the Blake reaction against the abstract visual is now the dominant cliché and claque of the big battalions, as they move in regimented grooves of sensibility. "For religious man, space is not homogeneous; he experiences interruptions, breaks in it." (p. 20) Likewise in time. For the modern physicist, as also for the non-literate, space is not homogeneous, nor is time. By contrast, the geometrical space invented in antiquity, far from being diverse, unique, pluralistic, sacral, "can be cut and delimited in any direction; but no qualitative differentiation and, hence, no orientation are given by virtue of its inherent structure."(p. 22) The next statement applies entirely to the relative interplay of the optical and the auditory modes in the shaping of human sensibility: It must be added at once that such a profane existence is never found in the pure state. To whatever degree he may have desacralized the world, the man who has made his choice in favor of a profane life never succeeds in completely doing away with religious behavior. This will become clearer as we proceed; it will appear that even the most desacralized existence still preserves traces of a religious valorization of the world. (p. 23) ## The method of the twentieth century is to use not single but multiple models for experimental exploration-the technique of the suspended judgment. the well-known notions of substance and attributable qualities can be derived from this operational dependence upon exactly repeatable verbal descriptions and definitions—for the very linear order in which words have to be used results in a syntactical time order analysis of qualities that actually are simultaneous and so intermingled and interrelated that no quality can be removed from one of the bundles of qualities we call objects without changing both it and all the other qualities. After all, a quality is only a quality of a group of other qualities, and if you change anyone of the group they all necessarily change. Whatever the situation may be from the point of view of a verbalist analysis, from the point of view of visual awarenesses of the kind that have to be used in an art museum the object is a unity that cannot be broken down into separate qualities without becoming merely a collection of abstractions that have only conceptual existence and no actuality. In a funny way words and their necessary linear syntactical order forbid us to describe objects and compel us to use very poor and inadequate lists of theoretical ingredients in the manner exemplified more concretely by the ordinary cook book recipes. Any phonetic alphabet culture can easily slip into the habit of putting one thing under or in another; since there is constant pressure from the subliminal fact that the written code carries for the reader the experience of the “content" which is speech. But there is nothing subliminal in non-literate cultures. The reason we find myths difficult to grasp is just this fact, that they do not exclude any facet of experience as literate cultures do. All the levels of meaning are simultaneous. Thus natives, when asked Freudian questions about the symbolism of their thoughts or dreams, insist that all the meanings are right there in the verbal statement. The work of Jung and Freud is a laborious translation of non-literate awareness into literary terms, and like any translation distorts and omits. The main advantage in translation is the creative effort it fosters, as Ezra Pound spent his life in telling and illustrating. And culture that is engaged in translating itself from one radical mode such as the auditory, into another mode like the visual, is bound to be in a creative ferment, as was classical Greece or the Renaissance. But our own time is an even more massive instance of such ferment, and just because of such "translation." As our age translates itself back into the oral and auditory modes because of the electronic pressure of simultaneity, we become sharply aware of the uncritical acceptance of visual metaphors and models by many past centuries. The linguistic analysis now followed by Gilbert Ryle at Oxford is an unremitting critique of visual models in philosophy: We should begin by dismissing a model which in one form or another dominates many speculations about perception. The beloved but spurious question, How can a person get beyond his sensations to apprehension of external realities?' is often posed as if the situation were like this. There is immured in a windowless cell a prisoner, who has lived there in solitary confinement since birth. All that comes to him from the outside world is flickers of light thrown upon his cell-walls and tappings heard through the stones; yet from these observed flashes and tappings he becomes, or seems to become, apprised of unobserved football-matches, flower-gardens and eclipses of the sun. How then does he learn the ciphers in which his signals are arranged, or even find out that there are such things as ciphers? How can he interpret the messages which he somehow deciphers, given that the vocabularies of those messages are the vocabularies of football and astronomy and not those of flickers and tappings? This model is of course the familiar picture of the mind as a ghost in a machine, about the general defects of which nothing more need be said. But certain particular defects do need to be noticed. The use of this sort of model involves the explicit or implicit assumption that, much as the prisoner can see flickers and hear tappings, but cannot, unfortunately, see or hear football matches, so we can observe our visual and other sensations, but cannot, unfortunately, observe robins.18 We become extremely conscious of cultural models and bias when moving from one dominant form of awareness to another, as between Greek and Latin or English and French. So we are no longer amazed that the oriental world has no concept of "substance" or of “substantial form," since they experience no visual pressure to break up experience into such packages. And we have seen how his training in the world of prints enabled William Ivins to translate the meaning of typography as nobody else has done. In his Prints and Visual Communication (p. 54) he offers a general principle: Thus the more closely we can confine our data for reasoning about things to data that come to us through one and the same sense channel the more apt we are to be correct in our reasoning, even though it be much more restricted in its scope. One of the most interesting things in our modern scientific practice has been the invention and perfection of methods by which the scientists can acquire much of their basic data through one and the same sensuous channel of awareness. I understand that in physics, for example, the scientists are happiest when they can get their data with the aid of some dial or other device which can be read by vision. Thus heat, weight, lengths, and many other things that in ordinary life are apprehended through senses other than vision have become for science matters of visual awareness of the positions of mechanical pointers. Does this not imply that if we can devise a consistent means of translating all aspects of our world into the language of one sense only, we shall then have a distortion that is scientific because consistent and coherent? Blake thought this had actually occurred in the eighteenth century when he sought liberation "from single vision and Newton's sleep." For the dominance of one sense is the formula for hypnosis. And a culture can be locked in the sleep of any one sense. The sleeper awakes when challenged in any other sense. 18Ryle, The Concept of Mind, pp. 223–4. ## Only a fraction of the history of literacy has been typographic. Till now we have been concerned mostly with the written word as it transfers or translates the audile-tactile space of “sacral"non-literate man into the visual space of civilized or literate or “profane"man. Once this transfer or metamorphosis occurs we are soon in the world of books, scribal or typographic. The rest of our concern will be with books written and printed and the results for learning and society. From the fifth century B.C. to the fifteenth century A.D. the book was a scribal product. Only one third of the history of the book in the Western world has been typographic. It is not incongruous, therefore, to say as G. S. Brett does in Psychology Ancient and Modern (pp. 36–7) : The idea that knowledge is essentially book learning seems to be a very modern view, probably derived from the mediaeval distinctions between clerk and layman, with additional emphasis provided by the literary character of the rather fantastic humanism of the sixteenth century. The original and natural idea of knowledge is that of “cunning" or the possession of wits. Odysseus is the original type of thinker, a man of many ideas who could overcome the Cyclops and achieve a significant triumph of mind over matter. Knowledge is thus a capacity for overcoming the difficulties of life and achieving success in this world. Brett here specifies the natural dichotomy which the book brings into any society, in addition to the split within the individual of that society. The work of James Joyce exhibits a complex clairvoyance in these matters. His Leopold Bloom of Ulysses, a man of many ideas and many devices, is a free-lance ad salesman. Joyce saw the parallels, on one hand, between the modern frontier of the verbal and the pictorial and, on the other, between the Homeric world poised between the old sacral culture and the new profane or literate sensibility. Bloom, the newly detribalized Jew, is presented in modern Dublin, a slightly detribalized Irish world. Such a frontier is the modern world of the advertisement, congenial, therefore, to the transitional culture of Bloom. In the seventeenth or Ithaca episode of Ulysses we read: "What were habitually his final meditations? Of some one sole unique advertisement to cause passers to stop in wonder, a poster novelty, with all extraneous accretions excluded, reduced to its simplest and most efficient terms not exceeding the span of casual vision and congruous with the velocity of modern life." In the Books at the Wake, James S. Atherton points out (pp. 67–8): Amongst other things Finnegans Wake is a history of writing. We begin with writing on A bone, a pebble, a ramskin . . . leave them to cook in the mutthering pot: and Gutenmorg with his cromagnon charter, tintingfats and great prime must once for omniboss stepp rubrickredd out of the wordpress'(20.5). The 'mutthering pot' is an allusion to Alchemy, but there is some other significance connected with writing, for the next time the word appears it is again in a context concerning improvement in systems of communication. The passage is: All the airish signics of her dipandump helpabit from an Father Hogam till the Mutther Masons , . .'(223.3). 'Dipandump helpabit' combine the deaf and dumb alphabet's signs in the air—or airish signs—with the ups and downs of the ordinary ABC and the more pronounced ups and downs of Irish Ogham writing. The Mason, following this, must be the man of that name who invented steel pen nibs. But all I can suggest for mutther' is the muttering of Freemasons which does not fit the context, although they, of course, also make signs in the air. "Gutenmorg with his cromagnon charter" expounds by mythic gloss the fact that writing meant the emergence of the caveman or sacral man from the audile world of simultaneous resonance into the profane world of daylight. The reference to the masons is to the world of the bricklayer as a type of speech itself. On the second page of the Wake, Joyce is making a mosaic, an Achilles shield, as it were, of all the themes and modes of human speech and communication: "Bygmeister Finnegan, of the Stuttering Hand, freemen's maurer, lived in the broadest way immarginable in his ruchlit toofarback for messuages before joshuan judges had given us numbers . . ." Joyce is, in the Wake, making his own Altamira cave drawings of the entire history of the human mind, in terms of its basic gestures and postures during all phases of human culture and technology. As his title indicates, he saw that the wake of human progress can disappear again into the night of sacral or auditory man. The Finn cycle of tribal institutions can return in the electric age, but if again, then let's make it a wake or awake or both. Joyce could see no advantage in our remaining locked up in each cultural cycle as in a trance or dream. He discovered the means of living simultaneously in all cultural modes while quite conscious. The means he cites for such self-awareness and correction of cultural bias is his "collideorscope." This term indicates the interplay in colloidal mixture of all components of human technology as they extend our senses and shift their ratios in the social kaleidoscope of cultural clash: "deor," savage, the oral or sacral; "scope" the visual or profane and civilized. ## Until now a culture has been a mechanical fate for societies, the automatic interiorization of their own technologies. Hitherto most people have accepted their cultures as a fate, like climate or vernacular; but our empathic awareness of the exact modes of many cultures is itself a liberation from them as prisons. Hence Joyce's title is also a manifesto. In a most competent survey, Man: His First Million Years, Ashley Montagu comments (pp. 193–4) on aspects of non-literacy in a way that relates to these themes: Nonliterate man casts the net of thought over the whole world. Mythology and religion may be closely related, but where one grows out of man's everyday life, the other grows out of his concern with the supernatural. And so it is with his view of the world, which will be compounded of secular, religious, mythological, magical, and experiential elements all rolled into one. Most nonliterate peoples are extreme realists. They are bent on bringing the world under control, and many of their practices are devised to insure that reality will perform according to their bidding. In the conviction that the spirits are on his side, a man may then make all the necessary preparations for the success of an expedition. Coercing reality to do one's bidding by manipulating it in the prescribed manner is, for the nonliterate, a part of reality. It is necessary to understand that nonliterate peoples identify themselves very much more closely with the world in which they live than do the literate peoples of the world. The more “literate" people become, the more they tend to become detached from the world in which they live. What happens is reality to the nonliterate. If ceremonies calculated to increase the birth of animals and the yield of plants are followed by such increases, then the ceremonies are not only connected with them but are part of them; for without the ceremonies the increase of animals and plants would not have occurred—so the nonliterate reasons. It is not that the nonliterate is characterized by an illogical mind; his mind is perfectly logical, and he uses it very well, indeed. An educated white man finding himself suddenly deposited in the Central Australian desert would be unlikely to last very long. Yet the Australian aboriginal manages very well. The aboriginals of all lands have made adjustments to their environments which indicate beyond any doubt that their intelligence is of high order. The trouble with the nonliterate is not that he isn't logical, but that he applies logic too often, many times on the basis of insufficient premises.

He generally assumes that events which are associated together are causally connected. But this is a fallacy which the majority of civilized people commit most of the time, and it has been known to happen among trained scientists! Nonliterates tend to adhere too rigidly to the rule of association as causation, but most of the time it works, and by the pragmatic rule what works is taken to be true. Nothing could be further from the truth than the idea that nonliterates are utterly credulous, superstition- and fear-ridden creatures, without any capacity or opportunity for independent and original thought. In addition to good horse sense, the nonliterate usually displays much practical sense based on an appreciation of the hard realities of life. . . . What Montagu opens up here concerning the intense practicality of the non-literate applies perfectly as gloss to Joyce's Bloom or Odysseus, the resourceful man. What could be more practical for a man caught between the Scylla of a literary culture and the Charybdis of post-literate technology to make himself a raft of ad copy? He is behaving like Poe's sailor in the Maelstrom who studied the action of the whirlpool and survives. May not it be our job in the new electronic age to study the action of the new vortex on the body of the older cultures? 