# Print altered not only the spelling and grammar but the accentuation and inflection of languages, and made bad grammar possible. In our time it is extremely evident that man is language, though he now recognizes many non-verbal languages as well as the language of forms. And this structuralist approach to experience engenders the awareness that “unconsciousness in relation to the one who knows is nonexistence."85 That is to say, that in so far as print structured language and experience and motivation in new ways not recognized in conscious ways, life was impoverished by mesmerism. Earlier in this volume, Shakespeare was shown as providing his contemporaries with a working model of print technology in action. For the separation of functions by mechanical inertia is the foundation of movable types and applied knowledge in all domains. It is a technique of reduction to a single level of problems, talents, and solutions alike. Thus Dr. Johnson "was scandalized by the untimeliness of many of Shakespeare's puns. For a character to quibble in the teeth of death, as many do in the plays, was contrary to reason, propriety and truth'."86 Not only did simultaneity of meanings have to go with the change from oral to visual culture, but pronunciation and pitch were flattened out so far as possible. Robert Hillyer writes in his In Pursuit of Poetry (p. 45): For the most part, we Americans do not avail ourselves of changing pitch. Unconsciously we avoid it as an affectation and lose half the effectiveness of our native tongue in one long monotone of drone, drawl, or growl. The effect is flat and blurred, especially since we run our syllables and words together, like a piece of prose without any punctuation. We ought to let every syllable come out round and full like a golden bubble! But we don't. The result is hard on poetry. The American voice is, in general, far richer than the English. Leaving out Cockney—and that super-Cockney, the "Oxford accent"—we mistakenly accord superiority to the English voice, whereas actually it is the flexible pitch that makes the Englishman's talk so much more articulate than ours. Pitch is to our language as gesticulation is to the French, its expressiveness, its emphasis, and its point. The Elizabethans doubtless spoke the language up and down through its whole gamut, and echoes of that eloquence linger in the talk of Irishmen today. Without sliding pitch the reading of verse cannot be effective. Americans have pursued the merely visual implications of print more whole-heartedly than anybody else, for reasons that will shortly appear. Gror Danielsson provides a wealth of specialist material to back up Hillyer in his Studies on Accentuation of Polysyllabic Latin, Greek, and Romance Loan-words in English. It has already been shown in relation to art and science and scriptural exegesis how the Middle Ages had tended steadily towards visual stress. It is now time to mention the gradual shift in medieval language, preparatory to the leap towards visual fixity represented by print. In general, then, in respect to the expression of the subject and object relations, the development in English has been away from inflectional devices which made it grammatically possible for subjects and objects to stand in any position among the words of a sentence, to the use of grammatically functioning fixed word order patterns which made the position before the verb “subject" territory and the position after the verb, “object" territory.87 Inflexion is natural to the oral or auditory culture, for it is a mode of simultaneity. Phonetic alphabetic culture strongly tends to reduce inflexion in favour of visual positional grammar. Edward P. Morris has a lucid statement of this principle in On Principles and Methods in Latin Syntax where the visual stress appears as

movement toward the expression of relation by single words. . . . The general movement by which single words have in part taken the place of inflection is the most sweeping and radical change in the history of the Indo-European languages. It is at once the indication and the result of a clearer feeling of concept-relation. Inflection in the main rather suggests than expresses relations; it is certainly not correct to say that in every case the expression of relation by a single word, e.g., a preposition, is clearer than the suggestion of the same relation by a case form, but it is correct to say that the relation can become associated with a single word only when it is felt with a considerable degree of clearness. The relation between concepts must itself become a concept. To this extent the movement toward the expression of relation by single words is a movement toward precision. . . . The adverb-preposition is the expression in more distinct form of some element of meaning which was latent in the case-form. It serves therefore as a definition of the meaning of the case-form. (pp. 102–4) 