# The levelling of inflexion and of wordplay became part of the program of applied knowledge in the seventeenth century. If there had never been a seventeenth century it could have been predicted that the continuing print-inspired movement towards visual word order meant elimination of the principle of verbal decorum, the ending of wordplay, and the insistence on homogeneity of utterance. Long before Bishop Sprat had worked out this implication of print for the Royal Society, Robert Cawdrey states it plainly. In 1604 he argues that wit (which implied erudition at that time) consisted not in strange words but in wholsom matter and apt declaring on a man's mind. . . . we must of necessitie banish all affected Rhetorique and use altogether one manner of language. Those therefore that will avoyde this follie, and acquaint themselves with the plainest and best kind of speech, must seek from time to time for such words as are commonlie received, and such as properly may expresse in plaine manner, the whole conceit of their mind.88 That we must “use altogether one manner of language" is a perfectly natural deduction from visual experience of the printed vernacular. And as Bacon showed, the reduction of talents and experience to a single level is the very crux of applied knowledge. But it is quite destructive of “the criterion 88Quoted in Jones, The Triumph of the English Language, p. 202. of decorum," as Rosamund Tuve designates, in Elizabethan and Metaphysical Imagery, the principle that had informed the language arts continuously from the Greeks to the Renaissance. Levels of style like levels of exegesis were part of an entire cultural complex, and exercised the thoughts of the Fathers with regard to the style of the Bible a great deal. John Donne is merely rehearsing a patristic commonplace when he writes: "The Holy Ghost in penning Scriptures delights himself not only with a propriety, but with a delicacy, and harmony, and melody of language; with height of Metaphors and other figures, which may work great impressions on the Readers, and not with barbarous or triviall, or market or homely language . . .89 Ignorance of the continuous operation of the principle of decorum in styles misled people like R. W. Chambers into notions of plain simple styles as growing out of some happy new principle of literary practice. Thus Bede, who wrote in all styles, is congratulated in the Cambridge History of English Literature because in his Ecclesiastical History: "It seems to be one great service he rendered to English writers that he gave currency to direct and simple style." R. W. Chambers confused the later nineteenth century cult of oral, colloquial simplicity with the sixteenth century practice of the low style in devotional treatises and sermons. Thomas More uses the high style in Richard III, and middle style for his satire the Utopia, and low style for his devotional work. Part of Donne's sophistication in decorum is a daring use of imagery from humble crafts in order to pose the paradoxes of the Divine humility of the Incarnation. The purpose here, however, is merely to indicate the range and depth of the tradition of decorum in the use of language for varied themes. For with print it had to be sheered off so that men could "use altogether one manner of language." The need to homogenize every kind of situation, in order to get the whole culture in rapport with the potential of the print technology, is an easily recognizable and understandable attitude. Bishop Sprat in his History of the Royal Society (1667) is prepared to dispense, not only with decorum and levels of style, but with poetry itself. Myths and fables were the fanciful rhetoric of the childhood of the race: the first masters of knowledge among them were as well Poets, as Philosophers; for Orpheus, Linus, Musaeus and Homer, first softened men's natural rudeness, and by the charms of their Numbers, allur'd them to be instructed by the severer doctrines of Solon, Thales and Pythagoras. This was a course that was useful at first, when men were to be delightfully deceiv'd to their own good. But perhaps it left some ill influence, on the whole Philosophy of their Successors; and gave the Grecians occasion ever after of exercising

their wit, and their imagination, about the works of Nature, more than was consistent with a sincere Inquiry into them.90 By a kind of metamorphosis it follows from Sprat's position (which tries to follow Bacon) that the modern scientist or philosopher is the true poet. And in order to purge the dross of the past from the present, Sprat sees the Royal Society as having “endeavour'd to separate the knowledge of Nature from the colours of Rhetorick, the devices of Fancy, or the delightful deceit of Fables." The procedure of separation and segmentation as the very technique of applied knowledge comes out clearly wherever a job of reducing antiquity arises. The members of the Royal Society being privy to this technique, repudiate "this vicious abundance of Phrase, this trick of Metaphors, this volubility of Tongue, which makes so great a noise in the world." They have therefore been most rigorous in putting into execution, the only Remedy that can be found for this extravagance: and that has been, a constant Resolution, to reject all the amplifications, digressions, and swellings of style: to return back to the primitive purity, and shortness, when men deliver'd so many things, almost in an equal number of words. They have exacted from all their members, a close, naked, natural way of speaking; positive expressions, clear senses; a native easiness; bringing all things as near the Mathematical plainness, as they can: and preferring the language of Artizans, Countrymen, and Merchants, before that, of Wits, or Scholars.91 