## A. ## SOME REFERENCES TO ORIENTATION We can look for references to the environmental image in many places: in literature ancient and modern, in books of travel or exploration, in newspaper accounts, or in psychological and anthropological studies. Such references are generally scattered, but are frequent and revealing. While skimming through them, we will learn something about how such images are formed, what some of their characteristics are, and how they seem to play a social, psychological, and esthetic, as well as a practical, part in our lives. From the accounts of anthropologists, for example, we infer that primitive man is normally deeply attached to the landscape he lives in; he distinguishes and names its minor parts. Observers refer to the multitude of place names, even in uninhabited country, and to the extraordinary interest in geography. The environment is an integral part of primitive cultures; the people work, create, and play in harmony with their landscape. Most often, they feel completely identified with it, are loath to leave it; it stands for continuity and stability in an uncertain world.4,38, 55,62 The people of Tikopia (Santa Cruz Islands) say: The land stands, but man dies; he weakens and is buried down below. We dwell for but a little while, but the land stands in its abiding-place.19 These environments are not only highly meaningful, but their image is a vivid one. Certain holy areas may become very highly charged, so that there is a strong focusing of attention, a fine differentiation of parts, a high density of names. The Athenian Acropolis, saturated with a long cultural and religious history, was evidently named and parceled to the gods small area by small area, almost stone by stone, making renovations extremely difficult. The Emily Gap, a small gorge 100 yards long by 30 yards wide in the MacDonnell ranges of central Australia, is to the native people a veritable gallery of legendary locations.72 In Tikopia, the Marae, a sacred cleared space in the forest, was used ritually only once a year. It was a small rectangle, yet contained over twenty locations with regular fixed names.19 Among more advanced cultures an entire city may be holy, such as Meshed in Iran, or Lhasa in Tibet.16,68 These cities are full of names and memories, distinctive forms, and holy places. Our environmental image is still a fundamental part of our equipment for living, but for most people it is probably much less vivid and particular today. In a recent story of fantasy, C. S. Lewis imagines that he has entered someone else's mind, and is moving about in her image of the outside world.43 There is a gray light, but nothing that could be called a sky. There are vague, dingy green shapes, blob-like, without anatomy, that he peers at and finally identifies as Shoddy Trees. There is soft stuff underneath, of a dull grassy color but without separate blades. The closer he looks, the more vague and smudged it all becomes. The environmental image has its original function in permitting purposeful mobility. A correct map might mean life or death to a primitive tribe, as when the Luritcha of central Australia, driven from their territory by four years of drought, survive by the precise topographic memory of the oldest men.55 These elders, from experience gained years before, and from the instructions of their grandfathers, knew the chain of tiny water holes that led them out across the desert to safety. The value of being able to distinguish stars or currents or sea-colors is obvious to the South Sea navigator for when he sets out to strike his tiny goal he engages in a gamble with death. Knowledge of this kind allows mobility, which may make possible a better standard of living. On Puluwat (Caroline Islands), for example, there was a famous native school of navigation. Because of this skill the people of Puluwat were pirates, able to raid the islands within a wide circle. Although such skills might seem unimportant today, we see things in a different light if we consider the cases of men who, through brain injury, have lost the ability to organize their surroundings.15, 47, 51 They may be able to speak and think rationally, even to recognize objects without difficulty, but they cannot structure their images into any connected system. These men cannot find their own rooms again after leaving them, and must wander helplessly until conducted home, or until by chance they stumble upon some familiar detail. Purposeful movement is accomplished only by an elaborate memorization of sequences of distinctive detail, so closely spaced that the next detail is always within close range of the previous landmark. Locations normally identified by many objects in context may be recognizable only by virtue of some distinctive, separate symbol. One man recognizes a room by a small sign, another knows a street by the tram car numbers. If the symbols are tampered with, the man is lost. The whole situation parallels, in a curious fashion, the way in which we proceed in an unfamiliar city. In the case of brain injury, however, the situation is inescapable, and its practical and emotional significance is manifest. The terror of being lost comes from the necessity that a mobile organism be oriented in its surroundings. Jaccard quotes an incident of native Africans who became disoriented.37 They were stricken with panic, and plunged wildly into the brush. Witkin81 tells of an experienced pilot who lost his orientation to the vertical, and who described it as the most terrifying experience of his life. Many other writers,5, 52,76 in describing the phenomenon of temporary disorientation in the modern city, speak of the accompanying emotions of distress. Binet mentions a man who took care to arrive at one particular railroad depot in Lyons when coming from Paris, because, although it was less convenient, it concurred with his (mistaken) image of the side of Lyons which lay toward Paris. Another subject felt a slight dizziness throughout his stay in a small town, because of the persistence of a mistaken orientation. The uncomfortable tenacity of an original and incorrect organization of the environment is attested in many sources.23 On the other hand, in the highly artificial and seemingly neutral situation of a laboratory maze, Brown reports that subjects developed affection for such simple landmarks as a rough board, which they recognized as familiar.8 Way-finding is the original function of the environmental image, and the basis on which its emotional associations may have been founded. But the image is valuable not only in this immediate sense in which it acts as a map for the direction of movement; in a broader sense it can serve as a general frame of reference within which the individual can act, or to which he can attach his knowledge. In this way it is like a body of belief, or a set of social customs: it is an organizer of facts and possibilities. The differentiated landscape may simply exhibit the presence of other groups or symbolic places. Malinowski, in discussing agriculture in the Trobriand Islands off the New Guinea coast, describes the tall groves which rise above the jungle brush and clearings, and which indicate villages or tabooed tree clumps.46 In a similar way, tall campaniles mark the locations of towns throughout the flat Venetian plain, or grain elevators the settlements of the American Midwest. The environmental image may go further, and act as an organizer of activity. Thus, on the island of Tikopia, there were several traditional resting-places on a trail that the people used to and from their daily work.19 Such locations gave form to the daily "commute.' In the sacred Marae on this island, a small clearing packed with place-names, the minuteness of distinction of locale was an essential feature of the complexly organized rituals. In central Australia, since the legendary heroes of the natives moved along certain "dreamtime" roads, these channels are strong parts of the landscape image, and the natives feel safe in traveling them.53 In Pratolini's autobiographical novel, he gives a striking example of people who in their daily walks continued to follow streets that no longer existed but were only imaginary tracks through a razed and empty section of Florence.56 At other times, distinguishing and patterning the environment may be a basis for the ordering of knowledge. Rattray speaks with great admiration of the Ashanti medicine men who strove to know every plant, animal, and insect in their forests by name, and to understand the spiritual properties of each. They were able to "read" their forests as a complex and ever-unfolding document.61 The landscape plays a social role as well. The named environment, familiar to all, furnishes material for common memories and symbols which bind the group together and allow them to communicate with one another. The landscape serves as a vast mnemonic system for the retention of group history and ideals. Porteus denies that the Arunta tribes of Australia have any special memory ability, although they can repeat extremely long traditional tales. Every detail of the countryside is a cue for some myth, and each scene prompts the recollection of their common culture.55 Maurice Halbwachs makes the same point in reference to modern Paris, when he remarks that the stable physical scene, the common memory of Parisians, is a potent force in binding them together and allowing them to communicate with each other.34 The symbolic organization of the landscape may help to assuage fear, to establish an emotionally safe relationship between men and their total environment. A quotation regarding the Luritcha people of central Australia illustrates the point. To each Luritcha child born in the shadow of these huge strange rocks, vast enough to awe the imagination of the white man whose eyes have beheld many wonders, the legends which identify them with the history of his own people must seem a source of great comfort. If these great rocks arose merely to mark the wanderings of his own spirit ancestors, it puts them in familiar relation with him. Legends and myths are more than tales told to while away the hours of darkness, they are part of the means by which the savage fortifies himself against the fear of the awesome and the unknown. Naturally tormented as the primitive man's mind is by the fears that are the product of loneliness, it is little wonder that he eagerly seizes on the idea that this vast, indifferent, if not inimical, Nature commemorates in many of its most striking features his tribal history, and is by the practice of magic subject to his control.55 Even in situations less lonely or frightening, there is a pleasant sense of familiarity or rightness in a recognized landscape. The Netsilik Eskimo put this well-worn idea in their own way: "to be surrounded by the smell of one's own things." Indeed, the very naming and distinguishing of the environment vivifies it, and thereby adds to the depth and poetry of human experience. Passes in Tibet may have such titles as "The Vulture's Difficulty," or the "Pass of the Iron Dagger," which are not only highly descriptive but are poetic evocations of parts of Tibetan culture.3 An anthropologist makes this comment about the Arunta landscape: No one who has not experienced it can appreciate the vivid reality of the myths. The whole country through which we passed was apparently only mulga scrub, a few gum creeks, a low or high range here or there, or some open plains, yet it was made a scene of much activity by aboriginal history. . . . So vivid are the tales that the investigator has the feeling of an inhabited area with much activity around: people hurrying hither and thither.54 While today we may have more organized ways of referring to our environment —by coordinates, numbering systems, or abstract names — we often miss this quality of vivid concreteness, of unmistakable form.40 Wohl and Strauss give many examples of the effort of people to find a shorthand physical symbol for the city they live in, both to organize their impressions of it and in order to carry on their daily activity.82 The feeling and value of an imageable environment are well summed up in Proust's moving description (in "Du Coté de chez Swann") of the church steeple in Combray, where he spent many childhood summers. Not only does this piece of landscape symbolize and locate the town, but it enters deeply into every daily activity, and remains in his mind as an apparition for which he still searches in later life: It was always to the steeple that one must return, always it which dominated everything else, summing up the houses with an unexpected pinnacle.57 ## Types of Reference Systems These images may be organized in different ways. There may be an abstract and generalized system of reference, at times explicit, at times rather a habitual manner of referring to the locations or relations of features. The Chukchee of Siberia distinguish 22 compass directions, three-dimensional and tied to the sun. They include the zenith and the nadir, midnight (north) and midday (south), all of which are fixed, plus 18 others which are defined by the sun positions at various times of the day or night, and therefore change with the seasons. This system is of sufficient importance to control the orientation of all sleeping rooms.6 The Micronesian voyagers of the Pacific used a precise directional system, which was not, however, symmetrical but was tied to constellations and to island directions. The number of directions varied up to 28 or 30.18 The system used on the North China plain is a strictly regular one. It has deep magical connotations: north being equated with black and evil, south with red, joy, life, and the sun. It controls very strictly the placing of all religious objects and permanent structures. Indeed, the chief use of the "south-pointing needle," a Chinese invention, was not for navigation at sea, but for the orientation of buildings. So pervasive is this system that the country people on this flat land give directions by compass points, and not by right or left, as would be natural to us. The organizing system does not center on the individual, moving and turning with him, but is fixed, universal, and outside the person.80 The Arunta of Australia, in referring to an object, habitually give its proximity, orientation, and visibility with reference to the speaker. An American geographer, on the other hand, once presented a paper on the necessity for orientation to our own four cardinal points, and was surprised to find from his audience that for many city people, accustomed to orient to conspicuous urban features, this is no necessity at all. He himself was brought up in open country, in the sight of mountains.52 For an Eskimo or an inhabitant of the Sahara, constant directions may be recognized, not by heavenly objects, but by prevailing winds, or by sand or snow formations which are the products of such winds.37 In parts of Africa the key direction may not be an abstract, constant one, but rather the direction toward the home territory. Thus Jaccard cites a joint encampment of several tribes, who spontaneously grouped themselves into sectors which pointed toward their own territories.37 Later he mentions the case of French commission merchants who have business in a succession of cities strange to them. They assert that they pay little attention to names or landmarks, but simply keep a continuous mental record of the direction back to the railroad station, and strike out for it directly when their work is done. Australian grave-mounds, as another example, are shaped with reference to the direction toward the individual's totem center, or spiritual home.72 The island of Tikopia is an example of another sort of system, which is neither universal, egocentric, nor directed toward a base point, but is tied to a particular edge in the landscape. The island is small enough so that one is rarely out of sight or sound of the sea, and the islanders use the expressions inland or seaward for all kinds of spatial reference. An axe lying on a house-floor is localized in this way, and Firth reports overhearing one man say to another: "There is a spot of mud on your seaward cheek." This reference pattern is so strong that they have difficulty in conceiving of any really large land mass. The villages are strung along the edge of the beach, and the traditional terms of guidance refer only to "the next village" or the one beyond the next, and so on. This is an easily referenced, one-dimensional series.19 Sometimes the environment is organized, not by a general directional system, but by one or more intensive foci, toward which other things seem to "point." In Meshed (Iran) extreme sacredness attaches to every object near the central shrine, including the dust which falls on the precinct. The high point on the approach to the city, from which the traveler first sees this mosque, is in itself important, and within the city it is proper to bow when crossing every street that leads to the shrine. This sacred focus polarizes and organizes the entire surrounding area.16 This is comparable to the custom of genuflecting in a Roman Catholic Church when crossing the axis of the altar, which orients the church interior. The city of Florence was organized this way in its centuries of greatness. At that time, description and locational references were made in terms of the "canti," that is, the focal points, which were such things as loggias, lights, coats of arms, tabernacles, important family houses, and key stores, especially pharmacies. Only later, the names of the canti attached themselves to the streets, which were subsequently regularized and signposted in 1785. Progressive house numbering was introduced in 1808, and the city shifted over to reference by paths.11 Imaging and referencing by districts was very common in older cities, where quarters and their populations were relatively stable, isolated and distinctive. In Imperial Rome, addresses were given solely by small defined districts. Presumably, arrival at such a district allowed one to proceed to one's final destination by personal inquiry.35 The landscape may be patterned by the lines of movement. In the case of the Arunta in Australia the entire territory is magically organized by a network of mythical paths linking together a series of isolated totemic "countries" or clan estates, and leaving waste areas between. There is normally only one correct trail to the sacred storehouse containing totemic objects, and Pink tells of the long detour made by one of his guides to approach a sacred place properly.54 Jaccard speaks of a famous Arab guide in the Sahara, who could follow the faintest trail, and for whom the entire desert was a network of paths. In one instance he followed painstakingly the continuous twists of the scarcely-marked way, even while his destination was clearly visible to him across the open desert. This reliance was habitual, since storms and mirages often made distant landmarks unreliable.37 Another author writes of the Saharan Medjbed, the transcontinental path worn by camels that goes for hundreds of kilometers over the empty land from water hole to water hole, marked by piles of stones at crossing points. It may mean death to lose it. He speaks of the strong personality, the almost sacred character, that this trace acquires.24 In quite another landscape, the seemingly impenetrable African forest, the tangle is intersected by elephant paths, which natives learn and traverse as we might learn and traverse city streets.37 Proust gives a vivid example of the sensation of a path reference system in his description of Venice: My gondola followed the course of the small canals; like the mysterious hand of a Genie leading me through the maze of this oriental city, they seemed, as I advanced, to be carving a road for me through the heart of a crowded quarter which they clove asunder, barely dividing with a slender fissure, arbitrarily carved, the tall houses with their tiny Moorish windows; and, as though the magic guide had been holding a candle in his hand and were lighting the way for me, they kept casting ahead of them a ray of sunlight for which they cleared a path.58 Brown, in his experiments in putting subjects blindfolded through a maze for the feet, found that even in this very restricted situation subjects seemed to use at least three different kinds of orientation: a memorization of the sequence of movements, usually difficult to reconstruct except in correct sequence; a set of landmarks (rough boards, sound sources, rays of sunlight that gave warmth) which identified localities; and a general sense of orientation in the room space (for example, the solution might be imaged as a general movement around the four sides of the room, with two excursions into the interior).8 Formation of the Image The creation of the environmental image is a two-way process between observer and observed. What he sees is based on exterior form, but how he interprets and organizes this, and how he directs his attention, in its turn affects what he sees. The human organism is highly adaptable and flexible, and different groups may have widely different images of the same outer reality. Sapir gives an interesting example of this differential focus of attention, in the language of the southern Paiute. They have single terms in their vocabulary for such precise topographical features as a "spot of level ground in mountains surrounded by ridges" or 'canyon wall receiving sunlight" or "rolling country intersected by several small hill-ridges." Such accurate reference to topography is necessary for definite locations in a semi-arid region. He goes on to note that the characteristic Indian vocabulary does not contain the English lumping-word, "weeds,"but has separate terms for these sources of food and medicine, terms which for each species distinguish whether the specimen is raw or cooked, as well as its color and stage of growth: as in the English calf, cow, bull, veal, and beef. He mentions, on the other hand, one Indian tribe whose vocabulary does not distinguish between the sun and the moon!66 The Aleuts have no native names for the great vertical features of their landscape: the ranges, peaks, volcanoes, and the like. Yet the tiniest horizontal aqueous feature—rill, streamlet, or pond—had its own name. Presumably this is because the tiny waterways are the environmental features which are vital for travel.26 The attention of the Netsilik Eskimo seems also to be riveted on the aqueous features. In a group of twelve sketch maps done by natives for Rasmussen, there are 532 place names indicated by the draftsmen. Of these, 498 designate islands, coasts, bays, peninsulas, lakes, streams, or fords. Sixteen refer to hills or mountains, and only 18 make scattered reference to rocks, ravines, swamps, or settlement sites.60 Yung makes an interesting reference to a trained geologist who was able to march unhesitatingly through foggy Alpine country, simply by his recognition of the patterning of the geologic type of the exposed rocks.83 Still another, and rather unusual, area of attention is sky reflection. Stefánsson says that in the Arctic low-hanging clouds of uniform color reflect the map of the earth below: those above open water being black, above sea-ice white, above soiled land-ice somewhat darker, and so on. This is of great value in crossing wide bays, where the landmarks are below the horizon.73 These sky reflections are commonly used in the South Seas, not only to locate an island below the horizon but even to identify it by the color and shape of the reflection. Some idea of the great range of forms which are available for orientation may be gained by a reading of Gatty's latest book on navigation.23 These cultural differences may extend not only to the features receiving attention but also to the way in which they are organized. The Aleutian Islands have no generic name in the native tongue, since the Aleuts do not recognize what to us appears to be the obvious unity of the chain.17 The Arunta group the stars quite differently than we do, frequently putting bright, close stars in different groups, while linking faint and distant ones.45 So adaptable is our perceptual mechanism, moreover, that every human group can distinguish the parts of its landscape, can perceive and give meaning to significant detail. This occurs no matter how undifferentiated that world may seem to an outside observer, This is true of the endless grey mulga thicket which is part of the Australian landscape; the flat snow-covered land of the Eskimo, where even the distinction between land and sea is lost; the foggy, shifting Aleutians; or the open "trackless" ocean of the Polynesian navigator. Two primitive groups developed a science of direction-finding and geography which was only recently surpassed by western mapmaking. These are the Eskimo and the navigators of the South Seas. The Eskimo are able to construct usable maps, freehand, covering territories sometimes 400 or 500 miles in one dimension. This is a feat of which few people anywhere are capable, without prior reference to constructed maps. Similarly, the trained navigators of the Caroline Islands in the Pacific had an elaborate system of sailing directions which were carefully related to constellations, island locations, winds, currents, sun positions, and wave directions.18,44 Arago stated that a celebrated pilot once represented all the islands in the archipelago for him by grains of maize, marked their relative position, named each one, and stated the accessibility and products of each. This archipelago is some 1500 miles from east to west! Furthermore, he made a compass from bamboo, and indicated the prevailing winds, constellations, and currents by which he guided himself. Both cultures producing these triumphs of abstract ability and perceptual attention had two things in common: first, their environments of snow or water were essentially featureless or differentiated only subtly, and second, both groups were forced to be mobile. The Eskimo must travel seasonally from one type of hunting to another, if he is to survive. The best seafarers in the South Seas did not come from the fertile high islands but from the tiny low islands, where natural resources were scanty and famine was always close. The nomad Touareg, in the empty Sahara, are a similar group, and have an almost equal ability. On the other hand, Jaccard notes that native Africans, of sedentary agricultural habit, easily become lost in their own forests.37 ## The Role of Form Nevertheless, having said so much about the flexibility and adaptability of human perception, we must now add that the shape of the physical world plays its part, as well. The very fact that skilled navigation arose in what would seem to be perceptually difficult environments indicates the influence of these outward shapes. The ability to distinguish and orient in these resistant environments is not achieved without cost. The knowledge was usually limited to specialists. Rasmussen's informants who drew his maps were chiefs—many other Eskimos could not do it. Cornetz remarks that there were only a dozen good guides in all south Tunisia.13 The navigators in Polynesia were the ruling caste. Knowledge was transmitted from father to son, and there was, as mentioned above, a formal school in the subject on the island of Puluwat. It was customary for the navigators to eat at a separate mess, where the talk was constantly of directions and currents. This is reminiscent of Mark Twain's Mississippi River pilots, who were constantly discussing and riding up and down the river, and thus keeping abreast of its treacherous shifting landmarks.77 Admirable as this skill is, it is some distance from an easy and familiar relation with the environment. Polynesian sea voyages were evidently accompanied by real anxiety, a usual sailing formation being a long row of canoes abreast to aid in finding land. Among the Arunta of Australia, as another example, it is only the old men who can lead from water-hole to water-hole or who can correctly locate the proper sacred path in the mulga thicket. On the well-differentiated island of Tikopia, the problem could hardly come up. We have frequent accounts of native guides who lose orientation in featureless surroundings. Strehlow describes floundering for hours in the Australian mulga thicket with an experienced native, who repeatedly climbed trees in the effort to get his bearings from distant landmarks.75 Jaccard recites the tragic cases of lost Touareg.37 At the other end of the scale, there are visual qualities in some landscape features which make them the inevitable subjects of attention, despite the selective power of the eye. Most often, sacredness is concentrated in the more striking natural features, such as the connection of the Ashanti gods with the great lakes and rivers, or the common reverence attached to great mountains. So in Assam there is a famous hill which is the legendary site of Buddha's death. It is described as bold and picturesque by Waddell, rising directly from a plain to which it is in sharp contrast. He then notes that it was worshipped by the aborigines long before, and has become holy for Brahmans and Mohammedans as well.78 For physical reasons, the great mountain on Tikopia Island is the central organizing feature. It is the crowning point of the island, both sociologically and topographically, the place of descent of the gods. It marks the location of home from far out to sea, and has an aura of the supernatural. Since the crest is rarely cleared and planted to taro, there is a peculiar flora here which is lacking down below, and this reinforces the special interest of the place.19 Occasionally, a landscape may be so fantastically differentiated as to compel attention. Kawaguchi describes the banks of a river near Lake Kholgyal in Tibet: . . . rocks piled up here and there, some yellow, some crimson, others blue, still others green, and some others purple . . . the rocks were highly fantastic, some sharp and angular, others protruded over the river. The nearer bank . . . was full of queerly shaped rocks, and each of those rocks bore a name . . . all these were objects of veneration to the common people.39 To take a humbler example, the territories defended by nesting birds in a meadow have been mapped over a succession of years. These territories show wide fluctuations and reorganizations, as might be expected from their occupation by different individuals. But certain perceptually strong boundaries of fence or brush remain stable throughout the shifts.50 Migrating birds, advancing in a general direction over a broad front, are known to direct their flight and follow along major "leading lines," or edges formed by topographic features such as seacoasts. Even swarms of locusts, who maintain cohesion and direction with reference to the wind, become disorganized and scattered when they move out over featureless water surfaces. Other features may not only be noticeable and distinguishable but even have a "presence," a sort of animation or peculiarly vivid reality, that is felt by peoples of utterly different cultures. Kawaguchi speaks of a holy mountain in Tibet, seen for the first time as "sitting with an air of great solemnity," and likens it to his own Buddha Vairochana, flanked by Bodhisattvas.39 A similar experience, closer to home, was the original impact of a particular escarpment along the Oregon Trail: . . . as the west-bound party drew abreast of the bluffs a wave of astonishment swept through it. . . . Numerous observers discovered lighthouses, brick kilns, the capitol at Washington, Beacon Hill, shot towers, churches, spires, cupolas, streets, workshops, stores, warehouses, parks, squares, pyramids, castles, forts, pillars, domes, minarets, temples, Gothic castles, 'modern' fortifications, French cathedrals, Rhineland castles, towers, tunnels, hallways, mausoleums, a Temple of Belus, and hanging gardens. . .. Taken at a glance the rocks 'had the appearance of Cities, Temples, Castles, Towers, Palaces, and every variety of great and magnificent structures . . . splendid edifices, like beautiful white marble, fashioned in the style of every age and country. . .69 Many observers are quoted, to indicate the common and overwhelming impact of these special geological shapes. Therefore, while noting the flexibility of human perception, it must be added that outer physical shape has an equally important role. There are environments which invite or reject attention, which facilitate or resist organization or differentiation. This is analogous to the ease or difficulty with which the adaptable human brain can memorize associated or unassociated material. Jaccard mentions several "classical locations" in Switzerland where people are consistently unable to maintain direction.36 Peterson notes that the organization of his image of Minneapolis typically breaks down each time the street gridiron changes its orientation.52 Trowbridge finds that most people are unable to point to distant cities from New York without gross errors, but that Albany is an exception, since it is visibly linked by the Hudson River.76 In London, a small development called Seven Dials was built about 1695, consisting of seven streets which converged on a circular junction containing a Doric pillar bearing seven sun dials, each facing one of the radiating streets. Gay refers to the confusing shape of this area in his Trivia, although he implies that it is only the peasant, the stupid outsider, who could be befuddled by it.25 Malinowski draws a sharp distinction between the differentiated volcanic landscape of Dobu and the Amphletts in the D'Entrecasteaux Islands near New Guinea, versus the monotonous coral islands of the Trobriands. These island groups are connected by regular trading expeditions, and the concentration of mythical meaning in the Dobu area, as well as the reactions of the Trobrianders to this imageable volcanic landscape, is described in his pages. Speaking of the trip from the Trobriands to Dobu, Malinowski says: The low strip of land, which surrounds the Trobriand lagoon in a wide sweep, thins away and dissolves in the haze, and before them the southern mountains rise higher and higher. . .. The nearest of them, Koyatabu, a slim, somewhat tilted pyramid, forms a most alluring beacon, guiding the mariners due south. . . . Within a day or two these disembodied misty forms are to assume what for the Trobrianders seems marvellous shape and enormous bulk. They are to surround the Kula traders with their solid walls of precipitous rock and green jungle. ... The Trobrianders will sail deep, shaded bays ... beneath the transparent waters a marvellous world of multi-colored coral, fish and seaweed will unfold itself . . . they will also find wonderful heavy, compact stones of various shapes and colors, whereas at home the only stone is the insipid, white dead coral .. . besides many types of granite and basalt and volcanic tuff, specimens of black obsidian, with its sharp edge and metallic ring, and sites full of red and yellow ochre. . .. Thus the landscape now before them is a sort of promised land, a country spoken of in almost legendary tone.46 In a similar way, although the "dream-time" roads of Australia pass in every direction over a land which is largely level mulga plain, yet the legendary camp sites, the nodes of sacred history and attention, seem to be heavily concentrated in the two regions of differentiated landscape: the MacDonnell and the Stuart's Bluff Ranges. Parallel to these comparisons of primitive landscapes we may put Eric Gill's comparison of Brighton, England where he was born, to Chichester, to which he moved in his adolescence: It had simply never occurred to me before that day that towns could have a shape and be, like my beloved locomotives, things with character and meaning . . . [Chichester} was a town, a city, a thing planned and ordered—no mere congeries of more or less sordid streets, growing, like a fungus, wherever the network of railways and sidings and railway sheds would allow. . .. I only knew that Chichester was what Brighton was not: an end, a thing, a place. . . . The plan of Chichester is clear and clean. . . . Over the Roman wall you could look straight out into the green fields. . .. Four straight wide main streets dividing the city into nearly equal quarters and the residential quarter similarly divided by four small streets and these almost completely filled with seventeenth- and eighteenth-century houses. . .. But Brighton, as we knew it . . . well, there is simply nothing to be said about it. When we thought of Brighton, it was of a place of which the center was our home . . . there was no other. But when we lived in Chichester . . . the center was not No. 2 North Walls, but the Market Cross. We gained not only a civic sense but a sense of ordered relations generally. . . . Brighton wasn't a place at all. It had never occurred to me that any other sort of town could exist.33 The perceptual clarity of the island of Tikopia, due to the presence of Mt. Reani, has already been mentioned. How a differentiated shape can be used in detail, is illustrated by this quotation: When a Tikopia sets out from his native land his first estimates of distance he has travelled are based on the portions of the island still showing above the horizon. There are five principal points on the scale. The first is the rauraro, the lowland near the shore. When this disappears, the voyager knows he is some distance out. When the cliffs (mato) arising 200 to 300 feet in various spots round the coast become lost, another point is reached; then the uru mauna, the crests of the chain of hills ringing the lake, perhaps 500 to 800 feet in height, sink below the waves. When the uru asia (the last break in the contour of Mt. Reani, about 1000 feet) goes down, then the voyager realizes he is far out to sea; and when at last he sees the uru ronorono, the tip of the mountain itself, vanish from sight, he greets the moment with sorrow.19 With the aid of a favorably differentiated landscape profile, this familiar phenomenon of parting has been regularized into accepted intervals, each with both practical and emotional meaning. When a character in a novel by Forster returns from India, he senses with sudden shock, on entering the Mediterranean, the sheer form-quality of his surroundings, their imageability: The buildings of Venice, like the mountains of Crete and the fields of Egypt, stood in the right place whereas in poor India everything was placed wrong. He had forgotten the beauty of form among idol temples and lumpy hills; indeed, without form, how can there be beauty? . .. In the old undergraduate days he had wrapped himself up in the many-colored blanket of St. Mark's, but something more precious than mosaics and marbles was offered to him now: the harmony between the works of man and the earth that upholds them, the civilization that has escaped muddle, the spirit in a reasonable form, with flesh and blood subsisting. Writing picture post-cards to his Indian friends, he felt that all of them would miss the joys he experienced now, the joys of form, and that this constituted a serious barrier. They would see the sumptuousness of Venice, not its shape.22 ## Disadvantages of Imageability A highly visible environment may have its disadvantages, as well A landscape loaded with magical meanings may inhibit practical activities. The Arunta face death rather than move to a more favorable area. The ancestral grave-mounds in China occupy desperately needed arable land, and among the Maori some of the best landing-places are forbidden because of their mythical import Exploitation is more easily accomplished where there is no sentiment about the land. Even conservative use of resources may be impaired where habitual orientation does not allow easy adaptation to new techniques and needs. Geoghegan refers to the richness of place names in Aleut but follows this with the interesting comment that there are so many particular names for each tiny feature that very often the Aleuts of one island have scarcely heard of the place names on another.26 A highly differentiated system, lacking abstractness and generality, may actually reduce communication. It may have consequences of another sort. Strehlow says of the Arunta: Since every feature of the landscape, prominent or otherwise, is already associated with one or the other of these myths, we can understand the utter apathy of literary efforts . . . their forefathers have left them not a single unoccupied scene which they could fill with creatures of their own imagination . . . tradition has effectually stifled creative impulse . . . native myths ceased to be invented many centuries ago . . . they are on the whole uninspired preservers . . . not so much a primitive as a decadent race.75 If it is desirable that an environment evoke rich, vivid images, it is also desirable that these images be communicable and adaptable to changing practical needs, and that there can develop new groupings, new meanings, new poetry. The objective might be an imageable environment which is at the same time open-ended. As a peculiar example of how this dilemma can be resolved, even in an irrational way, we may take the Chinese pseudo science of geomantics.32 This is a complicated lore of landscape influence, systematized and interpreted by professors. It deals with winds of evil that can be controlled by hills, rocks, or trees that visually seem to block dangerous gaps, and with good water spirits that are to be attracted by ponds, courses, and drains. The shapes of surrounding features are interpreted as symbolizing various spirits contained therein. This spirit may be accounted useful, or it may be inactive and useless. It can be concentrated or dispersed, deep or at the surface, pure or mixed, weak or strong, and must be used, controlled, or enhanced by planting, siting, towers, stones, and so forth. Possible interpretations are many and complex; it is an endlessly expanding field which experts are exploring in every direction. Divorced from reality as this pseudo science may be, yet it has for our purposes two interesting features: first, that it is an open-ended analysis of the environment: new meanings, new poetry, further developments are always possible; second, it leads to the use and control of outside forms and their influences: it emphasizes that man's foresight and energy rule the universe and can change it. Perhaps there are hints here as to ways of constructing an imageable environment that is not at the same time stifling and oppressive. 