3. Design and Mechanisation Was Machinery Bad for Design? \*Nikolaus Pevsner, Pioneers of Modern Design, 3rd edition, Harmondsworth, 1960, pp.42-43. \*Select Committee on Arts and Manufactures, Minutes of Evidence, Parliamentary Papers, 1836, vol. IX, para. 1431. It has long been the convention to see mid-Victorian design as degenerate and to blame this on the introduction of machine manufacture. In Pioneers of Modern Design, probably the single most widely read book on modern design, Nikolaus Pevsner described the state of mid-Victorian design as follows: 'It was not only that the machine had stamped out taste in industrial products; by 1850 it seems that it had irremediably poisoned the surviving craftsmen . . . Why was this bound to come? The usual answer because of industrial growth and the invention of machines "“ is correct, but as a rule taken too superficially . . . The development from simple mechanical devices to modern wonders of machinery was logical and gradual. Why did the machine in the end become so disastrous to art? The transition from the mediaeval to the modern state of applied art was reached somewhere about the end of the eighteenth century.'\* Pevsner goes on to list the well-known sequence of mechanical inventions of the industrial revolution, encouraging us to believe that they were the cause of the deterioration in design. But could inanimate, senseless machines have had anything to do with the quality of design and were they really the cause of all the evils attributed to them? And is the historical process which Pevsner outlined in Pioneers of Modern Design an accurate account of the development of design in industry? In his account of the degeneration of mid-Victorian design, Pevsner has followed closely the statements of those who saw the changes at first hand. The subject was much discussed in the nineteenth century, with repeated references to the evil influence of machines. A typical remark, though unusually early in its date (1835), is by the architect C.R. Cockerell: 'I believe that the attempt to supersede the work of the mind and hand by mechanical process for the sake of economy will always have the effect of degrading and ultimately ruining art.'\* Similar opinions were expressed by many others, among them John Ruskin, Richard Redgrave, editor of the Journal of Design which was published between 1848 and 1852, and William Morris. Within a short time, Cockerell's belief that machines led to inferior design had become widely accepted as incontrovertible truth. Thus Charles Eastlake could write with absolute conviction in his book Hints on Household Taste, which was published in 1868: 'Every lady recognises the superiority of hand-made lace and other textile fabrics over those which are produced by artificial means.

\*Charles Eastlake, Hints on Household Taste, reprinted Ontario, 1969, pp. 104-105. \*Siegfried Giedion, Mechanization Takes Command, New York, 1948, p.352. \*R. Samuel, 'The Workshop of the World', History Workshop Journal, no.3, Spring 1977, pp. 5-72. \*L. Weatherill, The Pottery Trade and North Staffordshire 1660-1760, Manchester, 1971, chapter 5. \*Karl Marx, Capital, vol. I, Part 4. References are to the Pelican edition, Harmondsworth, 1976. The same criterion of excellence may be applied to almost every branch of art-manufacture. The perfect finish and accurate uniformity of shape - the correct and even balance which distinguish European goods from those of Eastern nations, and English goods especially from those of other countries in Europe - indicate degrees not only of advanced civilization, but, inversely, of decline in taste.'\* The arguments put forward by the nineteenth-century design reformers and followed by Pevsner rested upon an assumption that machines had usurped the craftsman's control over the form of the product: the effect of machines, they believed, had been to change the practice of design by separating responsibility for the appearance of a product from the tasks of fabricating it, with the consequence that the quality of design had deteriorated. So strongly was this idea held that one of the main purposes of the Great Exhibition of 1851 was to demonstrate the truth of it: the intention of Henry Cole, the principal organiser of the exhibition, was to display machine-made products alongside the hand-made goods of India and the Orient so that the simplicity and superiority of design of the latter would be there for all to see.\* Yet despite the wide acceptance of the ideas embodied in the Great Exhibition, machines could not possibly have been the cause of the much denigrated specialisation in the work of design, which was already established long before the development of mechanised production. At no point did machines alone have any independent influence upon design. It is the persistence of Victorian writers' misunderstanding and prejudices that, even today, brings us back to the hoary old theme of the effect of machines on the quality of design. The histories of three nineteenth-century British industries calico printing, dress making and cabinet making - illustrate particularly well the actual relationship between the appearance of finished products and the machines used in their manufacture. It is important to remember that the extent of mechanisation in mid-nineteenth-century industries was far less than was, and still is, often supposed. As Raphael Samuel has shown, the manufacture of a great many products relied for a long time on the manual skill and strength of workmen.\* Even where machines were introduced, they were rarely applied to all the stages of production, and many processes continued to be carried out by hand: for instance in tailoring and dress making, until late in the century, machines were employed only for a few types of sewing. Of all British manufacturing industries in the middle of the nineteenth century, only textile production had been extensively mechanised. In the many industries that continued to be based on manual labour, products were still not necessarily made from start to finish by the same craftsmen: for example, the division of labour in the unmechanised pottery industry goes back as far as the early eighteenth century and it appeared in many other industries around the same time.\* This pattern corresponds closely to the three stages of the development of capitalist manufacture described by Karl Marx in Capital.\* After the initial condition of pre-capitalist societies, in which artefacts were made by individual craftsmen working on their own, Marx identified the first phase of capitalism as the simple co-operation of workers, who might, for example, 43

\*Marx, p.482. \*Marx, p.483. \*Marx, p.572. \*Marx, pp.548-549. \*Select Committee on the Copyight of Designs, Minutes of Evidence, Parliamentary Papers, 1840, vol. VI, para. 3062. share a workshop and purchase their materials and sell their goods collectively. In the second stage, the different tasks of hand manufacture were divided among the workmen under the direction of a master; the third stage came about with the introduction of machinery and the establishment of the factory system. In many British industries, the second stage, the division of labour in handicraft manufacture, took place in the eighteenth century: it was as the individual craftsman lost control of the complete process that the new and separate activity of design became necessary. Marx was referring to this stage when he wrote: 'The knowledge, judgement and will which, even though to a small extent, are exercised by the independent peasant or handicraftsman, in the same way as the savage makes the whole art of war consist in the exercise of his personal cunning, are faculties now only required for the workshop as a whole.'\* Marx went on to quote the Scottish philosopher Adam Ferguson (1725-1826) on the advantages of ignorance for successful manufactures: 'Ignorance is the mother of industry as well as of superstition. Reflection and fancy are subject to err; but a habit of moving the hand or the foot is independent of either. Manufactures, accordingly, prosper most where the mind is least consulted, and where the workshop may . . . be considered as an engine, the parts of which are men.'\* Writing in 1767, Ferguson closely anticipated Josiah Wedgwood's remarks about 'making machines of the men'. It was at the second handicraft stage of industry that design, as the drawing up of instructions, became necessary in order to direct the ignorance of the workmen. The introduction of machines, Marx later explains, made further changes both in the kinds of labour used (women and children rather than skilled artisans) and in the way it was used (to mind and regulate machines rather than for skill in production), but it had no effect on the essential characteristics of the process of which design was already a part. According to Marx: 'Machine production drives the social division of labour immeasurably further than manufacture does, because it increases the productive power of the industries it seizes upon to a much greater degree.' Elsewhere he wrote: 'The separation of the intellectual faculties of the production process from manual labour, and the transformation of those faculties into powers exercised by capital over labour, is . . . finally completed by large-scale industry erected on the foundation of machinery." This excursion into theory can be illustrated and substantiated by events in the history of calico printing, an industry in which design was of the greatest importance, since the commercial success of printed cotton relied almost entirely upon the appeal of the pattern. As one manufacturer asked, '. . . what is it that makes the trade at all? Is it not the design upon the fabric, and the colour upon it, and the invention of art that is put upon it; if you put more and better of all these things, you will have more trade.'\* 44

\*On the history of calico printing, see G. Turnbull, A History of the Calico Printing Industry of Great Britain, Altrincham, 1951; English Printed Textiles 1720-1836, catalogue, Victoria & Albert Museum, London, 1960 (text by P. Floud); and G. Dodd, The Textile Manufactures of Great Britain, London, 1844, pp. 58-60. \*Minutes of Evidence on the Calico Printers' Petitition, Parliamentary Papers, 1806-07, vol. II, p. 14. Engraving wooden blocks for textile printing in eighteenthcentury France. This was the original method of printing fabrics. From 'Arts et Métiers Méchaniques', Encyclopédie Méthodique des Arts et Métiers, n.d., vol. 8, plate 5. Because cotton was such a major industry in nineteenth-century Britain, the design of printed cottons received a great deal of public attention around the middle of the century. The technique of printing cotton from engraved wooden blocks was developed in the late seventeenth century.\* In the 1750s, a new technique was developed, using engraved copper plates, which were larger than the wooden blocks and could carry more detail. Whichever method was used, the printing itself was done by hand: the cloth was stretched out on a long table, and the printer worked along it, pressing the block or plate down upon the cloth, and inking it between each impression. Considerable skill was required in applying the correct quantity of ink, in registering the block accurately and in applying the right amount of pressure. The process was a slow one: it was said that one printer could not print more than six pieces of cloth a day (one piece equals 28 yards). By 1800, both the drawing of the designs and the cutting or engraving of the blocks had become entirely separate occupations from printing, and each craft had its own apprenticeship. In 1804, it was said that at Church Bank in Lancashire, 58 journeymen block cutters and 23 pattern drawers had entered the trade in the last 23 years. Even while the printing was still done by hand, the designing of patterns had already become a separate occupation. Although the introduction of engraved copper plates had made some difference to the appearance of calico prints, in permitting more detail and larger patterns with each impression, it had made no difference to the organisation of labour in the works. However, in 1796 came another technical development: the engraved plates were made into rollers, and it became possible to print an entire length of cotton continuously in a single mechanical process. The first roller printing machines were driven by water power,

## Above: Printing calico with an engraved wooden block, early nineteenth century. A slow and skilled process. From Book of English Trades, published by R. Phillips, 1823. Top right: Printing cotton from an engraved plate in a flat press, early nineteenth century. As well as allowing more detail in the engraving, plates were larger than blocks and production was therefore faster. From G. Dodd, The Textile Manufacturers of Great Britain, London, 1844, p.66. Design for printed fabric by Vivian Kilburn, England, c.1790. Designs of such detail were reproducible only with engraved plates printed on a press. 46

Roller printing press for printed cottons, England, early. nineteenth century. Roller or cylinder printing accelerated the production of cotton prints enormously. Note the simplicity of the designs being printed. From E. Baines, History of the Cotton Manufacture in Great Britain, London, 1835. \*Turnbull, p.83. \*J. Emerson Tennent, A Treatise on the Copyright of Designs for Printed Fabrics, London, 1841, p.23. \*The Rise and Progress of Great Manufactories by the Proprietors - Messrs. Hargreaves Calico Print Works at Broad Oak, Accrington', Journal of Design, vol. III, no. 15, May 1850, p.79. but it was not long before the introduction of steam made a much more rapid rate of production possible. Where it had been possible to print only six pieces a day on a single table, a steam-powered roller printing machine could print up to 500 pieces a day. Between 1796 and 1840, as a result of the introduction of these machines, the annual production of printed textiles in the United Kingdom increased from one million pieces to sixteen million pieces. Hand printing by blocks and plates continued and still survives, but only for specialised and highly detailed work. In 1840, there were 435 printing machines in the country and 8,234 printing tables; ten years later however, there were only 3,939 tables, while the number of machines had increased to 604.\* While hand printing declined, bringing considerable hardship among the craftsmen, the greatly increased output of printed cottons provided a growing demand for new designs, and the occupation of pattern drawing, already well established in the handicraft period of the industry, continued to flourish. In 1841, it was estimated that in Manchester alone 500 people were working as designers of printed cottons. Some were employed in-house by the cotton masters; others worked freelance and sold their patterns to printers. A few designers, usually artists who had taken to drawing patterns, were retained by manufacturers on an annual salary, but it was more common for pattern designers to be employed on a weekly wage. Of all the employees in calico printing they received the highest average wages. At one factory in 1850, the top wage for a designer was 60 shillings a week, while the rate for the next most highly paid trade, engraving, was no more than 50 shillings.\* The practice of the print masters was to have large numbers of designs prepared but to engrave and print only a few. One large Manchester manufacturer said that in 1838 his pattern drawers 47

\*Select Committee on the Copyright of Designs, Minutes of Evidence, Parliamentary Papers, 1840, vol. VI, para. 105. \*Select Committee on Copyright of Designs, 1840, paras 108, 2085, 2879. \*Select Committee on Copyright of Designs, 1840, paras 4646-47. \*Tennent, p.31. had prepared between two and three thousand designs, of which only five hundred had been engraved and printed.\* This apparent extravagance and wastefulness was possible because the designs cost so little in comparison to the cost of engraving the cylinders and printing the cloth. In the Report of the Select Committee on Design of 1840, different manufacturers gave estimates of the proportion that the cost of design bore to the total cost of production. Various manufacturers estimated the cost of preparing a design at between five pounds and fifteen pounds.\* One large manufacturer reckoned that design cost him between 2d. and 3/4d. per piece, while another said that it cost him 1/192 (0.52%) of the cost of the cloth and represented 1/352 (0.28%) of the selling price.\* It is worth pointing out that in spite of these infinitesimal costs, the value of the design to the manufacturer was very great. The cotton print masters relied for their profit on the volume of sales from the individual machine-printed designs, and the commercial success or failure of a particular print depended almost entirely on the popularity of the design. One manufacturer estimated that a single successful design had been worth between Â£200 and Â£300 in the receipts it had brought him.\* On an initial outlay of not more than fifteen pounds, this was a handsome profit. Because machine printing greatly increased the quantity of cloth that could be printed from a single pattern, it made a successful design far more valuable to manufacturers than could ever have been the case with hand printing. It is not surprising that it was in the 1830s Design for a cotton print, watercolour on paper, with a sample of the cotton printed from the design, English, early nineteenth century. The designs were drawn out to a large scale and reproduced for engraving. Manufacturers had hundreds of such designs produced, only a few of which were engraved and printed. 48

and 1840s, when machine printing began to expand rapidly, that manufacturers first became concerned to protect ownership of their designs. The major print masters began to campaign in the early 1830s for the copyright laws to be extended to cover designs for printed cottons, and, although other justifications, such as the argument that it would lead to better design, were put forward for copyright, the main object of the print masters was to establish their proprietorship over designs as a source of wealth. The debates over copyright gave rise to a great deal of discussion on other aspects of design. However, the new attention that was being paid to design did not mean that designing was a new activity or even that its essential nature had lately changed in any way because of the introduction of machines. Nevertheless, the view was sometimes expressed that the hand printed textiles of the early decades of the century were superior to the cylinderprinted designs of the 1830s and 1840s. Richard Redgrave put forward two reasons in the official report on design in the Great Exhibition of 1851 to account for what he saw as a deterioration in quality. His first point was that: 'Wherever ornament is wholly effected by machinery, it is certainly the most degraded in style and execution; and the best workmanship and the best taste are to be found in those manufactures and fabrics wherein handicraft is entirely or partially the means of producing the ornament . . .'\* \*Great Exhibition of 1851, Jury Reports, vol. IV, 'Supplementary Report on Design to Class XXX', pp.710-711. Printed cotton, English, 1850. This complex, illusionistic design, of the kind criticised by Redgrave, would have been printed by roller for the flat areas of colour and by plate for the detail. àªœàª¿ 49

useny Rearns lo. Sorter, 2. estal heat and dining 25 menalit (whil Cotton print samples in the record book of H. Fieldlong & Bros., dated 12th February 1824. This book records dye recipes and printing processes. These simple, repeat patterns of the kind admired by Redgrave were printed by roller. \*Great Exhibition of 1851, Jury Reports, vol. IV, p.745. \*Manuscript record book of H. Fieldlong & Bros of dye recipes and printing processes, datd 12th February 1824, Victoria & Albert Museum, Department of Textiles, 712-1956. 712-1956 What Redgrave liked were products in which the craftsmen had influenced the design, or been able to introduce variety; yet, if this had ever been the case in calico printing, it had ceased to be long before the nineteenth century, and certainly was not true of the patterns of the 1820s that he so admired. Redgrave's second reason for inferiority concerned the introduction of cylinder printing: 'The restrained use of means has often been adverted to ... under the old and simple methods of cotton printing, when the resources were few and the means were limited, the style was in some respects better than at present obtains... Thus block printing by hand required flat forms and flat tints diapered regularly over the surface, and some simple flower or leaf so used had a pleasing and just effect. . . In the place, however, of the former limited means, printing from metal cylinders has put at the command of the designer all those powers of more perfect imitation enjoyed by the engraver, and, instead of using them as they should be used, consistently with the requirements of manufacture and the principles of ornamental art, they are wasted on the imitation of flowers, foliage and accidents of growth, quite out of ornamental character and opposed to just principles.'\* Again Redgrave's analysis was at fault, for the 'restraint' he associated with block printing had been superseded, not by cylinder printing, but by the earlier invention of copper plate printing, which had been introduced in the handicraft stage of the industry. Far from offering 'more perfect imitation', cylinder printing, if anything, provided less, because the problems of register made it unsuited to designs with many colours. The evidence from calico printers' record books shows that during the 1820s it was the simpler patterns of the kind that Redgrave admired and thought to be handicraft products that were printed by cylinder, and the more complex, fussier ones of which he disapproved that were hand-printed. Even by the 1850s, when Redgrave was expressing these opinions, most cylinder-printed designs were still fairly

thul 18th 1824 Found / (Mch & Broke musling Hammered Bet's prenten & Chest by Cylinder 824 Juirfile by the Block And cun Groundedn hung Jclays Colet room Kr themelung of these on 227 page Back 3/ ã ® "‹Hand And 12. praes Dratin 12th of XXX Emader & 80.50fübilning Zhows. bring to 170. Back t Cotton print samples in the record book of H. Fieldlong & Bros., dated 12th February 1824. Left: A design printed by roller (for the large flat areas) and block (for the detail). Right: One of the most complex designs printed entirely by block, the hand process that Redgrave mistakenly believed produced simplicity in design. The Mechanical Fallacy: Fashion and Furniture \*Many of Mayhew's original letters were reprinted in his London Labour and the London Poor, 4 vols, 1860; a further selection is contained in The Unknown Mayhew, E.P. Thompson and E. Yeo, Harmondsworth, 1973. The latter is particularly relevant to this chapter since it contains the bulk of the coverage of the needleworkers and the cabinet makers simple, with rarely more than two colours, while many of the more ornate designs that were castigated by the organisers of the Great Exhibition were printed either entirely by hand from blocks and plates, or by a combination of block and cylinder. If the deterioration in design that Redgrave and others perceived was not the result of mechanisation, we have to ask what caused the changes they saw and go on to consider why they insisted on attributing them to the introduction of machines. To find explanations for changes in design, we have to look beyond the machines themselves to the social system in which they were used. In the effects both of the sewing machine upon costume design and of machine-cut veneers upon cabinet making, the crucial factor can be shown to be the particular characteristics of the relationship of labour to capital in the respective industries. The system of garment manufacture on the eve of the introduction of the sewing machine was described by Henry Mayhew in his letters to the Morning Chronicle in 1849.\* According to Mayhew, tailoring and dressmaking in London were divided into 'honourable' and 'dishonourable' sections. The 'honourable' section survived in establishments where only fully qualified journeymen were employed, mostly on a regular basis; they produced the highest quality of work, worked on the masters' premises, and were paid at piece rates on an agreement between masters and journeymen known as 'the log'. The forms of employment in the 51

## Above: Dressmaking workshop, 1850s. The state of exhaustion of the seamstresses suggests a sweatshop. From The British Workman and Friend of the Sons of Toil, September 1858. Right: Sweated tailor, 1850s. The man is working in his home, on garments that have been put out to him by a sweater. From The British Workman and Friend of the Sons of Toil, October 1855. \*The Unknown Mayhew, p. 140. \*The Unknown Mayhew, p.265. \*The Unknown Mayhew, p.141. \*The Unknown Mayhew, p.218. 'dishonourable' section were very different. The 'dishonourable' trade included tailors and dressmakers working casually for large tailoring and dressmaking establishments that were short of hands, but it consisted mainly of 'sweated' workers. Under the sweating system, tailoring or dressmaking houses put work out to a 'sweater', usually a journeyman, who contracted for the sewing of a quantity of garments. The sweater in turn put the work out to needleworkers at rates of pay much below those of the 'log'. The work was sometimes done in the workers' own homes, but increasingly in a workshop provided by the sweater. Mayhew quoted one sweated tailor's description of the system: 'The master here . . . gets work from the warehouse at the beforementioned prices; he gives it out to us at the same price, paying us when he receives the money. We are never seen at the shop [i.e. the warehouse]. Out of the prices the master here deducts 4s. per week per head for our cup of tea or coffee in the morning, and tea in the evening, and our bed.'\* In this case the sweater apparently made no profit out of the sewing itself, but only out of the deductions for food and lodging. Most sweaters, however, gave their workers a lower rate than they received on the completed goods; it was said that the sweater's normal rate of profit was two shillings in the pound on completed garments. The sweaters were effectively small capitalists who made their money out of the labour of the tailors and dressmakers working for them. Their capital consisted of the security, usually at least five pounds, which they had to give to the tailoring houses or wholesale warehouses on receipt of the cloth.\* It was the lack of even this small amount of capital that prevented the majority of needleworkers from getting work direct from the warehouses and compelled them to work for the sweaters. By 1849, an estimated six out of seven London garment workers were employed in the dishonourable trade, either as casual or as sweated workers, making ready-made shirts and outer wear for the large ready-to-wear men's clothing shops, and uniforms and liveries.\* The introduction of the sewing machine caused no fundamental change in the industry. Machines first became commercially available in 1851, and technical improvements over the next few years made them relatively efficient by the end of the decade. The 52

\*Royal Commission on Children's Employment, Second Report, Parliamentary Papers, 1864, vol.XXII, p. 163. \*Royal Commission on Children's Employment, 1864, para.410. \*For further discussion of the impact of the sewing machine, see Marx, vol. I, pp.601-604. \*The Unknown Mayhew, p.232. evidence to the Royal Commission on Childrens' Employment in 1864 shows that sewing machines were in widespread use by then.\* Most were bought by sweatmasters and installed in their workshops, as few individual workers could afford them. Because the sewing machine greatly increased the needleworker's output, it was to his or her advantage to seek a place in a workshop where machines were provided, accelerating the trend towards the employment of workers in workshops rather than in their own homes.\* Although manufacturers began to hire out sewing machines for one or two shillings a week, in theory allowing individual needleworkers to be their own masters and independent of the sweatshops, this was of little help to the workers, who still lacked the necessary capital to deal direct with the warehouses.\* The sewing machine, then, made no structural difference to the relationship between workers, sweaters and masters, except in tending to make needleworkers more dependent on the sweaters who provided the sewing machines. What the sewing machine did not do was further diminish the amount of control that individual garment workers had upon the form and appearance of garments. Evidence from the Royal Commission on Childrens' Employment and elsewhere shows that a division of labour between cutting and sewing, and between the sewing of various parts of garments was already well established before the introduction of sewing machines. A journeyman very rarely both designed and made a garment himself; it is because this was so unusual that Mayhew quotes one tailor as saying he had 'made a waistcoat of my own invention.'\* In general, the pattern and cut of garments was still determined by the masters and retail shops, just as it had been before the introduction of the sewing machine. However, it did appear to some contemporaries that the sewing machine had affected the design of clothes, but the reasoning here needs close examination. Because the sewing machine could not be used for the whole process of making clothes, some parts of the sewing of a garment became cheaper than others. The early sewing machines were good only for sewing flat seams and for sewing on trimmings. Machines for the blind stitching of hems, for buttonholing and for sewing on buttons were not developed until towards the end of the nineteenth century. Until then, these tasks had to be carried out by hand, even if the main seams of the garment could be machine sewn. It was only to be expected that garment manufacturers would want to exploit the parts of the process cheapened by the machine and to reduce as much as possible the more laborious and costly work of hand finishing. In women's dresses, the effect of the machines was greatly to increase the amount of trimming that could be applied to dresses for the same cost. A Cheltenham dressmaker giving evidence to the Royal Commission on Childrens' Employment stated: 'I have three machines. I should like every dressmaker to use them; they save much labour, and also enable you to pay at a higher rate those whom you employ, whether machinist or finisher. Much more work can be put in too; we should never put 100 yards of trimming in a summer dress, if it were all to be done by hand; the pleating up and finishing must still be hand-work; and we find it best to have different machines for different work, 53

\*Royal Commission on Children's Employment, 1864, vol. XXII, p.202, para.88. \*Quoted by C. W. & P. Cunnington, Handbook of English Costume in the Nineteenth Century, London, 1959, p.486. \*Cunnington, p.487. just as with hand-workers, one will do the sleeves, another the skirts and a third the bodies.'\* The great increase in the quantity of trimmings had its effect upon women's fashions. Dresses of the 1860s and early 1870s were loaded with trimmings: it seems that a hundred yards per dress was no exaggeration. Contemporary writers on fashion noted this development, and by the early 1870s had begun to deplore it. One wrote: 'What . . . will characterize the present epoch in the History of Fashion... is the amount of trimming with which we have found it possible to load every separate article.'\* It was supposed that the fashion was due to the sewing machine: 'We owe much of the over-trimming now prevalent to the facilities afforded by the sewing machine.'\* Convincing though this explanation may seem, it was valid only because sewing machines had been introduced into a capitalist system of manufacture. One of the main objects of the sweatmasters and clothing wholesalers, who controlled their use, was to cheapen the price of sewing. In other circumstances, the speed of the machines could have allowed the machinists to earn more or to work for only a few hours a day instead of the twelve or more that were customary for hand sewers. To the customer, the cost of Fashion plate, c. 1860, showing the heavily trimmed dresses that were fashionable, and which contemporaries wrongly attributed to the introduction of the sewing machine.

\*George Gifford, 'Argument of Gifford in Favor of the Howe Application for Extension of Patent', New York, United States Patent Office, 1860, referred to in Grace Rogers Cooper, The Sewing Machine, Its Invention and Development, 2nd edition, Washington D.C., 1976, p.58. \*See The Unknown Mayhew, pp.432-482. \*See, for example, the description of his shop in Liverpool by James Hopkinson, Victorian Cabinet Maker, edited by J.B. Goodman, London, 1968, p.96. \*London Labour and the London Poor, p.228. the sewing could have continued the same, and all the advantages would have been to the worker. There would then have been no virtue in designing dresses with great lengths of elaborate trimmings, since they would only have been more expensive. However, rather than paying the machinists at the same rate as the hand sewers, the sweaters actually paid them only a fraction of what the hand sewers received for an equivalent amount of sewing. In the United States, where circumstances were similar, a shirt factory in New Haven, Connecticut, paid its hand sewers in 1860 at the rate of 622 cents per shirt, but when sewing machines were installed, the machinists received only 163 cents for each shirt.\* To earn as much as hand sewers or, as was usual, slightly more (in this particular factory, machinists were paid four dollars per week compared to the hand sewers' three dollars), the machinists had to work almost as long hours. Of the money that the sweater or dressmaker saved, part went to pay the cost of the machine, part went to increase profits, but most went to reduce the price of sewing to the customer, so that more sewing could be put into a dress at no additional cost. Thus the ultimate cause of the fashion for heavily trimmed dresses was not now the sewing machine itself, but its use within a capitalist system of manufacture. Like the garment industry, the furniture industry in mid-nineteenth century London was divided into an 'honourable' section of men in regular employment, paid at agreed rates, and a 'dishonourable section of self-employed men whose earnings were much lower and were determined by bargaining with the retailer for a price on each piece of furniture made.\* The large majority of cabinet makers were self-employed men, working on their own, assisted (if they had any assistance) most often by their wives and children. Known as garretmasters, these men were indeed their own masters, but since they usually had no capital apart from their tools, and their livelihood depended upon selling each piece of furniture immediately they had made it, most of them were extremely poor. They generally made their furniture speculatively, carting it when it was finished to the West End to find a buyer among the furniture stores there. The stores were often accused of taking advantage of the garretmasters' desperate need for cash to beat them down to prices that hardly paid for their labour, for which the retailers earned themselves the name 'slaughterhouses'. Until about 1830, it seems that most furniture was made by journeymen employed in the workshops from which it was sold, and in many places outside London this continued to be common until much later in the century.\* There were also some masters, known as 'trade-working masters' who employed journeymen to make furniture which was sold wholesale to retail stores.\* However, between 1830 and 1850, the regular employment of cabinet makers declined, and more and more became garretmasters, who by 1850 outnumbered the former by ten to one. The change appears to have been caused by the rise of the large furniture retailers who had sufficient capital to hold stocks of furniture for some time, and found that their expenses were much reduced by not having to employ directly the men who made the furniture. Many of the slaughterhouses were said to be unconcerned about the quality of the furniture they sold, as long as it was superficially good enough to take in the customers. One garretmaster reported 55

\*London Labour and the London Poor, p.225. \*Morning Chronicle, 4th July 1850, p.6. \*London Labour and the London Poor, p.230. The Unknown Mayhew, p.477. to Mayhew that he had been told by a slaughterhouse: 'Make an inferior article so as it's cheap: if it comes to pieces in a month, what's that to you or me?' The garretmaster continued: 'There's no doubt of it that the linendrapers [furniture retailers] have brought bad work into the market, and have swamped the good. For work that ten or twelve years ago, I had Â£3 5s. to Â£3 10s. from them, I have now 30s. Of course it's inferior in quality in proportion . . .'\* Under the influence of the slaughterhouses, such 'scamping' became widespread. Garretmasters found themselves having to make twice as many pieces in the same time as men honourably employed in order to stay alive. Nothing made scamping easier than machine-cut veneers, which became available cheaply with the introduction of steam-powered circular saws in the 1830s. Previously, veneers, cut by the most skilled branch of the hand sawyers, had been relatively expensive and used only in high class cabinet work. However, as one old hand sawyer explained to Mayhew, the circular saw changed all this by cutting veneers thinner and faster: "They was cut more true than any sawyer could do them, but not half as well as they are now. The first that was done was eight to the inch, and now they can cut fourteen, as thin as a wafer, and that's impossible for the best sawyer in the world to do. I have cut as many as eight in the inch myself, but then the wood was very shallow eight or nine inches deep. The general run of veneers cut by hand was about six in the inch.'\* By 1850, when Mayhew recorded this statement, all veneers were cut by steam power, and their price was much reduced as a result. Machine-cut veneers were a boon to the garretmasters in their need to make superficially good furniture as cheaply as possible. Mayhew described how the garretmasters used them: 'The frequent use of rosewood veneers in the fancy cabinet, and their occasional use in the general cabinet trade, gives, I was told, great facilities for scamping. If, in his haste, the scamping hand injure the veneer, or if it has been originally faulty, he takes a mixture of gum shellac and "colour", (colour being a composition of Venetian red and lamp black) which he has already by him, rubs it over the damaged part, smooths it with a slightly heated iron, and so blends it with the colour of the rosewood that the warehouseman does not detect the flaw. Indeed, I was told that very few warehousemen are judges of the furniture they bought and they only require it to look well enough for sale to the public, who know even less than themselves.'\* Another garretmaster, talking about the production of ladies sewing boxes said: 'Such boxes are nailed together; there's no dove-tailing, nothing of what I call work or workmanship, as you say about them, but the deal's nailed together, and the veneer's dabbed on, and if the deal's covered, why the thing passes.'\* The use of veneers was especially singled out by those to whom Mayhew spoke, and by others involved in the furniture industry, as one of the reasons for the quality of furniture. In the hands of 56

Garretmaster, 1860. The garretmaster, who has just made the chest-of-drawers on the barrow behind, is negotiating a price for it with a furniture retailer. From H. Mayhew, London Labour and the London Poor, 1861, vol. 3. BUTCH FORNIT Cheap Hand sawyer. Veneers, like all timber, were originally cut by two sawyers, one above and one below. The introduction of steam-powered circular saws made the craft redundant. From Book of English Trades, published by R. Phillips, 1823. \*Morning Chronicle, 8th August 1850, Letter LXIV, 'Fancy Cabinet Makers of London'. the garretmasters, cheap, machine-cut veneers allowed an enormous change in the appearance of low-quality furniture which, rather than being simply made of deal, could now have all the appearance of superior products. As one garretmaster said to Mayhew: 'I think that machinery has been a benefit to us: it increases the material for our work. If there wasn't so much veneering, there wouldn't be so much fancy cabinet work.'\* Although the veneer-cutting machinery facilitated the development of a new kind of furniture production, it would again be wrong to suppose that machinery was responsible for any deterioration in quality. As the garretmasters themselves told Mayhew, it was the growth of the slaughterhouses that had mainly caused the decline in standards, because the low prices they offered the cabinet makers encouraged scamping on a large scale. Machine-cut veneers provided just another means of scamping but were not themselves the cause of the practice. As with the sewing machine and dress making, it was not the machine itself that brought about 57

The Politics of Design \*On these various matters, see Quentin Bell, The Schools of Design, London, 1963; T. Kusamitsu, 'Great Exhibitions before 1851', History Workshop Journal, no.9, Spring 1980, pp. 70-89. changes in design, but the use of machinery under specific economic and social circumstances. Both garment manufacture and cabinet making involved a very simple level of technology and a relatively straightforward set of economic relations between capital and labour, but even when the technology is more complex, machinery alone has never determined the appearance of the goods. To attribute changes in design purely to technology is to misunderstand the nature both of machines and of design in industrial societies. The idea that machines had ruined design represented only a small part of a much larger debate during the 1830s and 1840s, a period when design became an issue of national political importance in Britain. It was the subject of three Parliamentary Select Committees, in 1835-36, 1840 and 1849; there was pressure to set up, and subsequently to improve, government-subsidised schools of design, there was a campaign to establish copyright over designs, and there were numerous exhibitions of art and design, culminating in the Great Exhibition of 1851, all organised with the intention of improving public taste and educating artisans.\* The underlying reason for this concern was that the development of machine production had made design very much more valuable to manufacturers. Maximising the sales from each design had not been so crucial in handicraft industries, where, although profit might depend on the volume of production, there was not necessarily any advantage in using a single design rather than a variety of different ones. In the hand printing of calico, for example, additional output required more tables, more printers and more blocks, but since each additional block had to be cut by hand, it made little difference if it was made to a new design or duplicated an existing one. The great advantage of machinery was its potential to manufacture a single design endlessly; the successful design became a very much more valuable possession, for it was what released the machine's capacity to make a profit. It was natural, therefore, that it was in the industries being mechanised in the second quarter of the nineteenth century that the greatest concern about design was shown, over both improving standards and protecting copyright. The timing of all this in the late 1830s and early 1840s can also be explained by the severe economic conditions of those years. In what was the first trade depression ever to affect the newly industrialised economy, manufacturers and political economists were anxious to know whether capitalist industry would survive at all and, more immediately, to ensure that Britain did not lose her share of world markets to foreign competitors. Although Britain was better equipped to produce consumer goods, particularly textiles, more cheaply and in greater quantity than any other country, there were fears that Britain's trading position was threatened by foreign competitors who could manufacture goods of superior design. Whether the competitors' products were in fact better designed is an open question; what mattered was that their design was different and many English people believed it to be superior. In the circumstances, the improvement of design seemed vital for Britain's economic survival and caused people to advocate remedies that were wholly contrary to the principles of classical economics and laissez faire which dominated politics at 58

Small veneered box, c. 1860. This box is a typical product of the garretmaster, taking advantage of cheap veneers. The box itself is of rough deal, as can be seen inside the lid; the veneer conceals the poor quality of the carcase. the time. Copyright of design gave manufacturers a form of protection which interfered with free market competition, while the government subsidy of schools of design represented a form of state assistance to industry- another kind of interference with the 'natural laws' of the economy. Design was therefore a sufficiently important issue to cause even such strong advocates of laissez faire government as the political economist Nassau Senior 59

\*N.W. Senior et al., On the Improvement of Designs and Patterns, and Extension of Copyright, London, 1841. \*Select Committee on Arts & Manufactures, Parliamentary Papers, 1836, vol. IX, para. 1593. \*Select Committee on Arts & Manufactures, 1836, vol. IX, para. 1598. to compromise their principles and recommend some legislative intervention in the interests of better design.\* The events of these years in some ways anticipated the much more extensive state involvement with design in Britain in the 1930s and 1940s, when similarly adverse economic conditions threatened the exports of manufactured goods. A major issue in the nineteenth-century debates was the cause of the apparent inferiority of British design. Two particular explanations appeared repeatedly and are worth looking at in order to understand the reasoning of those involved. One, the supposedly deleterious effect of mechanisation, has already been dealt with in this chapter; the second attributed the poor quality of design to the British workman's ignorance and lack of artistic ability. A great deal of weight was attached to this argument by some, who used it to justify setting up schools of design and organising exhibitions of art and design. Only, it was said, by educating artisans in the art of design, could any improvement in standards be looked for. This argument, too, needs to be approached with caution. There were people at the time who disagreed with it, and gave good grounds for doing so. In his evidence to the Select Committee on Arts and Manufactures in 1835, J.C. Robertson, the editor of the Mechanics' Magazine, pointed out that the argument was based on a misunderstanding of the nature of industry: in practice, it was unnecessary for artisans to have any design ability, since all that factory production required of them was the ability to execute the designs given to them. He added that he did not believe that there was any lack of ability among those concerned with design. When asked if designers were sufficiently instructed, he replied: 'I think they generally are sufficiently instructed. I have never met, in all my experience, any want of talent, in designing any branch of manufacture.'\* His own explanation for the inferiority of British design directed blame in an entirely different direction. Any superiority of French goods, he said, 'is owing to the talents of our artisans being employed in a more profitable direction than to any inferiority of taste in them. The great object with every English manufacturer is quantity; with him, that is always the best article to manufacture of which the largest supply is required; he prefers much a large supply at a low rate to a small supply at a higher; and that even should the present profit be less from the former than from the latter, because, in the long run, the larger the demand, the steadier it is sure to be. I do not think this is a point which has been sufficiently considered. From the great command of capital possessed by the English manufacturer, the immense capabilities of his machinery, and the unrivalled skill and industry of his workmen, he is enabled to turn out a greater quantity of goods in a given time than the manufacturer of any other country whatever.'\* Robertson was attributing bad design not to the workmen's lack of skill, but to the capitalist system of manufacture, which always put quantity and profit before quality. Although his explanation anticipated what William Morris later had to say about the causes of bad design, the argument was not to be found in the other 60

\*Art and Its Producers', Collected Works of William Morris, vol. XXII, London, 1914, p.352. evidence given to the Select Committee and hardly appears in the rest of the mid-century literature on the subject. In general, other writers and design reformers chose to concern themselves almost exclusively with such peripheral subjects as artisans' lack of artistic skill and the influence of machines. What the critics of design were unable to see or refused to acknowledge, was that capitalist manufacture, itself the cause of the specialised work of design becoming necessary, was simultaneously responsible for the quality of design deteriorating. Yet the artists, architects and intellectuals who involved themselves in design reform in the mid-nineteenth century, were far too closely associated with industrial and commercial wealth to dare venture on such a radical line of criticism. While many of them disliked the effects of industry, they had no alternative conception of what an industrial society could be like, and it was thus extremely difficult for them to make any criticism of their own society that did not threaten the source of their own prosperity. Short of abandoning all the material progress of the previous century and a half and returning to a simple handicraft economy (which was very much what John Ruskin recommended), they could envisage no way of building a society with an abundance of wealth, but without the concomitant evils. Only a socialist like William Morris was in a position to see that criticism of industrial society need not necessarily be regressive and that there could be an alternative which did not preclude material progress. It was therefore open to Morris, through his socialism, to blame the poor quality of design upon the greed of capitalism when others hesitated, or were unable, to do so. Although Morris disliked mechanisation and thought its products ugly, he did not insist that it was the sole cause of inferior design. As he said in one lecture: 'It is not this or that tangible steel and brass machine which we want to get rid of, but the great intangible machine of commercial tyranny, which oppresses the lives of all of us.'\* The practice of blaming machinery for bad design conveniently diverted criticism away from capitalism and focused attention on the technical problems of production rather than on the much more difficult and contentious social ones. It was, after all, much easier to see how machines might be redirected to make better design than to conceive how the social relations of capital and labour might be reconstituted to the same end. But what is so remarkable about the myth of the machine as the agent of bad design is its survival into the present despite far greater understanding of the nature of society. Whatever the reasons for its unnaturally long life, the myth has had the effect of obscuring the central place that design holds in production. To treat design in terms only of technical or artistic factors invariably makes it seem trivial and insignificant, detracting from its unique characteristic of embodying, in the most vivid and concrete way, not some but all of the conditions surrounding the production of commodities. In a nineteenth-century calico design, we are looking not only at the product of a steam-powered roller press, nor only at the results of the artistic skill of an individual pattern designer, but also at the product of a system in which it was possible for one man to profit by purchasing the labour of many others at a price which paid for little more than their subsistence.
