## Dr M. H. J. Schoenmaekers and Neo-plastic Theory The first attack on the De Stijl artists came from the mathematician-philosopher, Dr M. H. J. Schoenmaekers in his lectureArt and Thought', published in the January 1918 issue of Het Getij (The Tide), an important art, literary and philosophy magazine. Ín addition to describing art as essentially ‘capricious', Schoenmaekers remarks, ‘Do not explain your works, you artists who want to be style-artists,'¹ which can be seen as addressed principally to Mondrian, whose art-philosophical ideas, as well as their formulation, are indebted to Schoenmaekers. Ironically, Schoenmaekers had written two years earlier, ‘As long as the language of words has not explained clearly the new insight by direct, general forms from nature, plastic artists also will try to speak in words ... They do not as yet consider their art to be sufficient.'2 This was written at a time when Mondrian had practically stopped painting, during the years 1915 and 1916. În these two years he produced only a few paintings in the proto Neo-plastic style he had ended with in 1914, and he was using this lapse of time to work on his large essay Neo-plasticism in Painting'. During these years Mondrian and Schoenmaekers. who both lived in Laren, frequently met. There is little doubt that Schoenmaekers saw in Mondrian's works of that period, which consisted of linear, horizontal-vertical constructive compositions and reduced colour to gradations of the three primaries, the visualization of his ideas as presented in his own books Het nieuve Wereldbeeld (The New Image of the World) (1915) and Beginselen der beeldende Wiskunde (Principles of Plastic Mathematics) (1916). This is why he could include paragraphs on art which can be seen to fit this type of plastic expression. On the other hand, Mondrian, who was sorting out his views and trying to determine his position in those years, considered that Schoenmaekers' ideas in general, in spite of their esoteric character, might provide his theory on Neoplasticism with an objective, philosophical background. However, the process of interweaving several philosophical notions ofSchoenmaekers with his own views posed so many problems that Mondrian invited Van Doesburg to go over his essay before publication. The latter collaborated on this theory by correcting several paragraphs and by occasionally rewriting larger fragments which were again considered by Mondrian before their final publication in De Stijl during 1917 and 1918. Van Doesburg was searching for expressions of universal intelligibility in both the theory and practice of art, which explains why he, too, used some typical Schoenmaekers formulations in his articles of 1916 and 1917. However. Van Doesburg demonstrates much less affinity to Schoenmaekers than does Mondrian. On 30 January 1918 Mondrian drew Van Doesburg's attention to the lecture‘Art and Thought' and confirmed Van Doesburg's opinion that Schoenmaekers'view of their art was basically wrong. In spite of Mondrian's agreement with Van Doesburg shortly afterwards to withdraw an invitation to Schoenmaekers to contribute to De Stijl, his own theory continued under the influence of Principles of Plastic Mathematics. This book in particular - the only one by Schoenmaekers in Van Doesburg's library – is a key document for the theoretical-philosophical background of Neo-plastic writing. In contrast to Mondrian, Van Doesburg was only more fully influenced by it much later, during the years when he introduced his Elementarism and his final approach, called Concrete Art. At this time, reacting to Art and Thought', Van Doesburg advised Mondrian to read Spinoza and furthermore revealed his difference of opinion with Schoenmaekers in a series of articles called ‘The mysticism of Beauty and Love',3 and in an article ‘Thought-Vision-Creation'(p. 108).4 Both articles demonstrate the difficulties involved in stating that Neoplasticism represents in truth a predominantly conceptual art, since intuition, intellect, emotion and pure thought occur in an unsettled terminology. The entire matter - as will be discussed later – was to become more complicated by the fact that Schoenmaekers predicates art to be the final. concrete manifestation of universal thought, in contrast to Hegel, whose philosophy Van Doesburg was beginning to read and who expected a development leading from art towards religion and finally ending with philosophy.