## Le Corbusier's criticism of De Stijl The De Stijl exhibition attracted much interest and was discussed in L’Esprit Nouveau, in an article by Ozenfant and Jeanneret (Le Corbusier) called ‘The Straight Angle'.1 They described it as a ‘negative demonstration' of a movement in art which, by restricting itself to the rectangle, could merely ‘stammer'. Criticism continued in the next issue of the same periodical, in a review of the publication The De Stijl exhibition of architecture at the Rosenberg Gallery also included the design for an octagon-shaped university hall by Van Doesburg and Van Éesteren. The ceiling of this hall consisted of a large stained-glass composition. At this exhibition the manifesto ‘Towards Collective Construction' signed by Van Doesburg, Van Eesteren and Rietveld was distributed. Later on it was published in several magazines including De Stijl,4 albeit signed there only by Van Doesburg and Van Eesteren. The name of Rietveld was added to the exhibition manifesto offered at the gallery and appeared with the models reproduced in the De Stijl issue of L’Architecture Vivante as a result of the De Stijl desire to be seen as a collective creative force (it has been shown that Rietveld's only contribution consisted of the maquette of the Rosenberg house). This attitude also explains why Oud and Wils participated in the exhibition, although by this time neither was any longer actively involved with De Stijl. Other participants were the architect W. van Leusden, who worked in the De Stijl manner for a short time, and Vilmos Huszar, the designer of the original De Stijl cover. Staatliches Buhaus – Weimar, with the title Pedagogics'.² Ozenfant and Jeanneret in this article stated that Gropius had associated with the idea of the De Stijl group from Amsterdam, also represented by the painter Theo van Doesburg – painter, but also theoretician of a young architecture, the aesthetics of which are based on principles that are rudely simple (though very interesting since, at any rate, they demonstrate the strength of any system whatsoever)'. In the same issue Le Corbusier commented upon the architecture in the Rosenberg Gallery exhibition in an article called Le Salon d'automne'.3 In a dialogue between a certain Mr X and Fernand Léger, under the heading ‘Confusing Derivations That Had to Follow', Mr X considered the use of colour on the exterior a form of camouflage destroying architecture, whereas the colour designs of the interiors chauvinistically were said to stem from Léger, who was described as having ‘made school' with them. This criticism stems from the fact that the Purism of Le Corbusier and Ozenfant was the outcome of Synthetic Cubism with its return to representational form, via a novel use of ‘standard objects'. Conversely De Stijl represented the logical continuation of Analytical Cubism towards an art of pure plastic means. In an article with the significant title ‘No Axiom but a Plastic Principe4 Mondrian came to the defence of this fundamental Neoplastic norm on ideal development. His short essay served as a reply to the criticism of De Stijl architectare published in both issues of L’Esprit Nouveau. Early this year Van Doesburg gave a series of lectures in Germany. A lecture on De Stijl and its consequences in painting, sculpture and architecture, alternated on successive evenings with a lecture under the titleArt as an Obstacle to Progress',5 which was directed against the many iitations of De Stijl, especially those to be found in industrial design. There followed an exhibition of Van Doesburg's work at Weimar, which also included his architectural designs, although without the models. In the spring the De Stijl architecture exhibition moved from the Rosenberg Gallery to the Ecole Spéciale d’Architecture in Paris, as part of the larger exhibition,Architecture and the Arts Attached to it'. In the May issue of L'Esprit Nouveau Le Corbusier produced another review with the title ‘The Exhibition at the Ecole Spéciale d'Architecture'.6 He used theory derived from his interpretation of Wright to criticize the Van Doesburg and Van Eesteren models. This use of Wrightian comment can be interpreted as an effort to defeat De Stijl on its own grounds. Le Corbusier wrote: After the initial revival facing us here, with its multiple forms leaning against one another and arbitrary and tormented silhouettes that create at first an architectural sensation, the time will come when it is realized that light is much more generous with a simple prism. Then this complexity, this abusive richness and these exuberant forms will become disciplined under the shield of pure form. One will know that the whole possesses a greater value than five or ten parts. This tendency towards a pure whole, covering abundance with a mask of simplicity, can be the only outcome. We have time to wait. Le Corbusier. confronted here with a dynamic four-dimensional architecture, explains why he did not envisage from his more classical point of view its organic unity in spite of the many parts. In ‘An Answer to Our Enquiry: Where is Modern Painting Going?",7 a series of articles published in Bulletin de l’Effort Moderne, Van Doesburg in turn presented the following answers to all previous criticisms: ‘The future will be against any illusion that painting and sculpture are separated from life, in short, any subjective expression of life by means of illusion will disappear', and ‘The constructive painter has already understood that colour is a creative element in architecture.’ His most important point - one derived from Kandinsky – is that instead of form', which refers to Le Corbusier's ‘single prism', there will be a coloured construction in three dimensions.‘In this construction the onlooker will find himself right in the middle of painting.' These statements were addressed to the Purist artists who assumed Synthetic Cubism, with its return to the recognizable object, to be the logical outcome of abstract Analytical Cubism and continued this development by employing naturalistic objects which were reduced to their basic or pure form and which were accordingly called standard' objects. At the same time these criticisms were addressed to the Functionalists who considered the fine arts a lesser thing and discarded any aesthetic approach in their architecture. Another attack on L'Esprit Nouveau and defence of De Stijl came from Hans Richter, who, in an article in G using the same title as that of the French magazine, accused its editors of holding patriarchal, sentimental and academic views in spite of their boast to foster the new.8 This criticism was preceded by an appreciative article, also by Richter, dedicated to De Stijl and to Van Doesburg,9 and mentioned at the same time the latter's influence at the Bauhaus. In addition, the same issue of G □ carried a short contribution by Van Doesburg entitled ‘The Spiritual ...'10It accompanied a reproduction of one of Van Doesburg's paintings from 1918 and expressed some thoughts on the human character of ‘completely abstract art' addressed to the‘confused sentimentalism' and ‘acclaimed' humanism of Purism. Interestingly, the painting reproduced closely resembled Rhythms of a Russian Dance. At a time when criticism was being directed against his architectural models, the choice of this painting indicates that Van Doesburg realized that his use of the four-dimensional principle in architecture was closely related to that visualized in his early Neo-plastic paintings.