## De Stijl's dualism of mind and matter In the early spring of 1926, the De Stijl exhibition held in Rosenberg's Gallery went on to Nancy on the initiative of the architect, André Lurcat. This time the exhibition did not include the architectural models which the year before had been ruined by humidity when stored in the cellars of Albert Morancé's publishing house. Around this time Van Doesburg became acquainted with A. F. del Marle, the editor of Vouloir. Organe Constructif de Littérature et d’Art Moderne and a former Futurist, who was soon to become a follower of Neo-plasticism. In March Vouloir publishedMondrian's article‘Art, purity+ abstraction',1 written that same month, and Van Doesburg's ‘Towards Elementary Art',² written the month before. Curiously, Van Doesburg's contribution, though possessing many characteristics of a manifesto, failed to become one. Instead, it presented a summary of all earlier achievements in the manner of his ‘Towards Elementary Plastic Expression' published in 1923. It describes the earlier achievements as also being ‘elementaristic' but does not sav what Elementarism has come to represent, nor mention the visual oblique. The only indication of Van Doesburg's new thinking on the expression of movement was to be found towards the end in the sentence,‘Due to the confidence we can have in our spiritual Power, we have renovated the Plastic domain. The explanation for Van Doesburg's restraint can be found in Mondrian's article Art, purity +abstraction'. This key document in the controversy between Neo-plasticism and Elementarism puts forward an unusually sharp critique for Mondrian. At the same time, Mondrian used this opportunity to outline his position on several phenomena in the art of his time. L'Esprit Nouveau is attacked by a formulation of what truly represents the new spirit, namely, the union of matter and spirit in pure abstraction rather than through the return. to a naturalistic art, (i.e. Purism). Functionalism is seen as substituting utility for art. There is, in the criticism of Functionalism an undertone of disagreement with Van Doesburg's ‘The End of Artwhich, in Functionalist terms, rejected ‘aesthetic speculation'. In contrast to Van Doesburg Mondrian believed that art should be based on pure intuition' instead of ‘cerebrality'. He answered Van Doesburg's rejection of Neo-plasticism's ‘classical statics' by stating that Neo-plasticism was also an expression of vitality, capable of evoking the force of life or life's joy. He defended himself against Van Doesburg's opinion that abstract Neo-plastic art was an extreme refinement of Renaissance traditions of naturalistic art by stating that abstract art, although derived from the abstraction of nature and manifesting itself in the geometric appearance of horizontal-vertical polarity, cannot be called abstract art for this reason alone. To this end ‘creativity' is an indissoluble ingredient, which is why the work of art is a human counterconstruction to nature's construction, ‘whether in architecture or in painting', Mondrian added significantly. These notions were soon to be elaborated upon in Van Doesburg's manifestos on Elementarism and on Concrete Art. They clearly reveal the passionate character of the debate between both artists on an issue which concerned the very nature of the duality of matter and mind. From this point on, each artist was to solve this problem in a different way. Mondrian would continue to secure the annulment of conflict between the two poles through the equilibrium of horizontal and vertical elements, whereas Van Doesburg would try to achieve the same end through the combination of the spiritual (the oblique) with the physical or natural (the horizontal-vertical) element by means of contrast. For Mondrian, the spiritual was expressed in the work of art which used the horizontal-vertical right-angle relationship in its composition, which is why in his view Van Doesburg's use of the forty-five degree angle introduced a superfluous cerebral, visual element. This projected schism between man and nature and the resulting disagreement about the nature of the concrete, the real in abstract art, is the cause of their conflict. It explains why Van Doesburg temporarily hesitated to say in ‘Towards Elementary Art' that the dynamic ‘spiritual force' is literally and tangibly expressed by the visual oblique. However, shortly after Mondrian had stated his point of view, De Stijl published Van Doesburg's Painting: From Composition Towards Counter-Composition’(p. 151).³ Here the Elementarist oblique was described as being in opposition to the horizontal-vertical structure in nature and architecture, ‘although no duality is created', and as the result of providing ‘a new dimension again to our imagination'. In this article, Van Doesburg's unsettled attitude towards ideas borrowed from Hegel and Schoenmaekers becomes very clear. Elementarism, as an effort to introduce greater spirituality in art, arose precisely at a time when his architectural activity had temporarily halted. Van Doesburg's persistent search for the material expression of his artistic ideas, now that it appeared his new concept of life. could not be immediately realized through architecture (Neo-plasticism), generated the urge to embody philosophical concepts in painting by means of Elementarism. In large part Elementarism is, of course, a remnant of the Rationalist view held in the last phase of the mimetic period in art, which saw art as being in competition with nature. This explains why the ideas arose of philosophy beginning when art ends (Hegel) and of philosophy finding its deepest, ultimate manifestation in plastic visualization (Schoenmaekers). Although Van Doesburg was gradually to decide in favour of Schoenmaekers' view. he differed even from him in letting the spiritual prevail over the material element. With Hegel, spirit itself is all reality, thus representing an opposition to the physical. For Schoenmaekers, however, spiritual and material reality exist as a unity of counterparts (the horizontalvertical) in equilibrium. It is on this latter view that Mondrian based his criticism of Van Doesburg's visual oblique as a superfluous cerebral element. It remains to be said that the terms ‘counterpart' and ‘opposite' are of extreme importance in both Neo-plastic and Elementarist theory. From their use one can often detect whether Van Doesburg was inclining towards the ideas of Schoenmaekers or of Hegel, although in several instances he tried to evade all difficulty by fusing both terms with his use of the relatively neutral term ‘contrast'. Furthermore, it was not by accident that Van Doesburg referred to articles written in 1914. since Elementarism was also the outcome of ideas originating at that time. The article, Painting: From Composition Towards Counter-Composition' and the fragmentary manifesto that was to follow, Painting and Plastic Art' (p. 156)4 also were a reaction to the manifestos of Kemeny and Moholy-Nagy. Both articles state their opposition to Futurism and Gleizes' ‘Painting and Its Laws' by advocating instead of the mimetic suggestion of motion and the shift of rotation of planes, the use of the oblique as the unique way to visualize movement. In part, Elementarism went along with the ideas on culture found in an article on abstract film, ‘Principles of Motion Art' by Hans Richter.⁵ which advocated the cinema as the ideal form of kinetic art, but it tried also to demonstrate that the element of motion need not imply the replacement of painting, since painting can realize sensations of motion with the dynamics of the visual oblique. Some roots of Elementarism can also be seen in ‘Modern Painting and its Relationship to Architecture' by Bart van der Leck, published in De Stijl in 1917.6 There Van der Leck stated, Modern painting is the destruction of plastic natural form in contrast to plastic natural constructive form in architecture'(Point One), and, ‘modern painting represents painting in spatial two-dimensionality, that is extension in contrast to the space-limiting two-dimensionality of architecture' (Point Four). Moreover, in 1918 Van der Leck wrote to Van Doesburg. ‘Not only the construction of the universe, that is stability, but also universal movement must be taken into account in the plastic expression of painting. In painting this can be achieved by the free and the oblique."7 Van Doesburg's visual oblique came ultimately to represent for him the (fourth) dimension of the (human) spirit in contrast to the three dimensions of nature-reality, visualized in a concrete way. To achieve this view he had reasoned as follows: naturalistic art. the Renaissance, had reached its perfection in abstract art, Neo-plasticism, where natural reality turned into abstract reality. Now that art had become abstract reality it must become real' art which, in the Hegelian sense, was to say purely ‘spiritual'. Thus, the following paradox came into being, that is to say, the spiritual element was materialized in a concrete, that is to say, a realistic (naturalistic) way, by means of the Elementarist visual oblique. This was one reason why subsequently mathematics and arithmetic, representing pure activities of the mind and products of reason, would come into the picture. The same paradox indicates that Elementarism was a reaction to Mondrian's essay ‘Natural Reality and Abstract Reality', which will be discussed at a later point. The fragmentary manifesto Painting and Plastic Art' was written in Rome, where Van Doesburg discussed Elementarism with the Futurists Marinetti, Prampolini and Balla, among others. The manifesto revealed Marinetti's suggestion that the term ‘counter-composition' be replaced by ‘anti-static' painting. Apparently, after having been confronted with Mondrian's opinion, Van Doesburg wanted to hear the views of the Futurists, apart from or perhaps just because of the fact that, in his own painting, he had worked out the visualization of dynamics in a non-Futurist manner. The tone of these discussions can be seen in the Elementarist manifesto in the occasional use of the typically heroic tone of Futurism. In particular, Marinetti's manifesto ‘The New Religion Morality of Velocity' (1916) again influenced Van Doesburg's artistic theories. Marinetti's view that the spirit of contradiction represents the expression of life and that creative genius expresses velocity are of special relevance here. Marinetti's thought, in its turn, was related to that of Bergson (especially Spiritual Energy, 191l), the philosopher par excellence for Futurism, according to August Joly.8 It remains to be added that, in discussing artistic theory with the Futurists, Van Doesburg came into contact with their new political views as well. In an unprinted article ‘The Situation of Modern Art in Italy'9 written in Rome in August, he came out strongly opposed to Fascism. (An earlier rejection can be found in the ‘The End of Modernisms'.) At this time in Rome Van Doesburg completed his colour theory which was intended as the first part of ‘The Theory of Plastic Construction (in four parts).10"The other three parts were never written, and the first remained unprinted. Two points are of especial importance in this theory. First, Van Doesburg expressed his dissatisfaction with the current situation in architecture which he divorced from the other arts and considered a science instead. Second, he stated that the end and the means represent one and the same thing - a view new to him whose ramifications made matter and mind not equivalent but equal. As I. K. Bonset, Van Doesburg wrote in ‘To be', from The other face, the lines ‘not to be consistent (to be oneself) is not being, inconsistent but never being true'(p. 161).11 This might have been intended as a paradoxical rejoinder to Mondrian who reproached Van Doesburg for being inconsistent as far as his ‘additional' oblique was concerned. Nowhere was the schism between Neoplasticism and Elementarism drawn more sharply than in another fragmentary manifesto dating from April 1927, Paiņting and Plastic Art: Elementarism' (p. 163).12 In the opening lines Van Doesburg related Elementarism to Neo-plasticism by describing the former as having come into existence partly as its (Neo-plasticism's) consequence but ultimately from what is primarily a radical correction of Neo-plastic ideas'. Apart from representing a correction of Van Doesburg's own ideas, the article was again intended as a criticism of Mondrian. Thus. Mondrian's horizontal-vertical composition, because it was ‘homogeneous' with natural construction, was condemned as ‘an accentuation of our physique, of the natural structure and functions of the organism'. (Van Doesburg's italics.) This approach must now be replaced by a‘heterogeneous, contrasting, unstable manner of plastic expression based upon planes which are oblique in relation to the static, perpendicular axis of gravitation'. As early as 1925, some Elementarist compositions appear to extend endlessly beyond their canvas limits without depending upon a stabilizing gravitational centre. Van Doesburg in this respect was approaching, although from a reverse direction, the concept of the absolute as expressed in the dynamic manifestos of Kemeny and Moholy-Nagy. Although they had opposing views on the relative primacy of the spiritual or the material Van Doesburg and Kemeny and Moholy-Nagy shared common ground in believing that energy, either spiritual or material universal, is an irreducible substance. With Van Doesburg ‘human spirit' was to become identified more and more with ‘absolute spirit', in accordance with Hegel's philosophy. In Hegel's view, the mind realizes that whatever is opposed to it as an object, as matter, the entire physical and non-physical universe, is nothing other than spirit itself. It can thus grasp that it is itself all being and all reality, which is to say, in fact, the Absolute.13 (To what degree the divergence of opinion on the relationship of matter and mind between the various isms of the l920s was also closely related to political preferences, goes beyond the scope of the present survey.) Between these two positions, the predominance of either the spiritual or the material, can be found a third approach, which posits matter and mind to be equal. This is, in fact, the attitude Van Doesburg was injecting into Mondrian's Neo-plasticism which, paradoxically enough, the former artist now came to see as abstract naturalism or even abstract mimeticism. As such, Elementarism developed as a reaction to one of Mondrian's most important essays, written in 1919-20, Natural Reality and Abstract Reality'. However, in the third scene of the dialogue, Mondrian's principle of equivalence' of the spiritual' and the ‘physical' expressed in equilibrium, is explicitly stated not to represent any ‘equality' of or any ‘similarity' between these two.14 Having established his theories, Van Doesburg now said that Neo-plastic composition washomogeneous' with nature, while Elementarist composition was ‘heterogeneous' or opposite to nature. If, through positing mind and matter as equal, Mondrian's orthogonal composition became homogenous with the horizontalvertical construction in nature, then the next step one might expect, would be that mind is substituted for matter. This is what happens when Van Doesburg's oblique (spiritual) compositionreplaces orthogonal(naturalistic) composition. This development suggests that Van Doesburg himself first went through a phase in which matter and mind were posited as equal (e.g. as in his ‘Theory of Plastic Construction’). Mondrian's view does, in fact, correspond to Hegel's fundamental ideal of classical composition. It is also related to Schoenmaekers' philosophy as expressed in his Principles of Plastic Mathematics, in that it argues the perfect balance and union of spirit and matter - a notion which is equally based on the Hegelian ‘the something being determined by the other'. Thus, for Mondrian, 'the something' cannot go without ‘the other'. In Van Doesburg's interpretation, however-and here we touch upon the core of the matter – this is, ultimately, changed into the substitution of ‘the something' for 'the other'. As Hegel does in Philosophy of Spirit, he singles out one extreme of a polarity (in this case the spiritual) and turns it into an absolute. Yet Van Doesburg did not follow Hegel to his definition of the fundamental type of romantic art in which the spirit predominates over matter, but tried instead to surpass it by substituting spirit entirely for matter. In so doing he was breaking with Hegel's idea that the three fundamental types of art, the symbolic, the classical and the romantic, in this order describe the evolution of art, and that, through its increasing spirituality, ultimately art would cease to exist and turn into religion, before culminating in philosophy. Thus, Van Doesburg argued in Painting and Plastic Art' that religion and philosophy represent obsolete forms that now had been