## The Weissenhofsiedlung The above considerations on the duality of matter and mind leave untouched Van Doesburg's achievements in four-dimensional architecture. A need for further theoretical clarifireplaced by the art of Elementarism. In fact, by fusing the abstract (spirit) with the visual (painting as a sense-object) in a kind of‘visual philosophy', he was moving away from Hegel and coming closer to Schoenmaekers' Principles of Plastic Mathematics. Schoenmaekers held the anti-Hegelian view that thought (the spiritual) would find its deepest and most meaningful manifestation by visualization. ‘Painting and Plastic Art' is also the best example of the unsettled mixture of notions derived from Hegel and Schoenmaekers to be found in Van Doesburg's writing. In attempting to evade the implied difficulties, Van Doesburg substituted the word ‘contrast' for ‘opposition' and for ‘counterpart'in almost all cases, and furthermore demonstrated his annoyance with the problem of terminology by calling the dualities nothing but formulae. In summary, Van Doesburg followed Hegel's philosophy in its striving for absolute spirituality but – as an artist – turned against it when it demanded that he move towards religion or philosophy. Schoenmaekers, on the other hand, was much more sympathetic, describing art as the most meaningful presentation of philosophy. It is this hesitation between two opinions, both closely connected with a philosophical definition of as well as his direct, sensuous approach to reality, which explains several discrepancies in his theory. cation on the relationship between his Neoplastic architecture and his Elementarist painting did not escape Van Doesburg either, for in the manifestoPainting and Plastic Art' he wrote, Elementarism entirely rules out architecture as an art. Experience and research over the years have shown art and architecture to represent two completely different and incompatible entities.' This statement almost amounts to a denial of Van Doesburg's greatest achievement. His attitude was, however, to prove a temporary one, pointing towards other related circumstances. 'First, Van Doesburg's position as an artist in France as has been shown, was more or less isolated when compared to the active role he had played in Germany between 192l and 1923. Moreover, the Weissenhofsiedlung in Stuttgart, a plan for a modern town-quarter which was submitted and accepted in the summer of 1925, and realized in 1927, caused the Dutch artist considerable uneasiness. Apart from the influence of Hoffmann and Loos and the Futurist architecture of terraces. the Weissenhof architecture also reveals a debt to De Stijl. In spite of his criticism, Le Corbusier produced a cantilevered architecture which was strongly reminiscent of the Van Doesburg and Van Eestèren model for a studio house. Further indebtedness to De Stijl can be noted in the following quotation from Mies van der Rohe, from his introduction to a special issue of Die Form dedicated to this Werkbund exhibition, called ‘Die Wohnung' (The House). He wrote,‘The battle-cry “rationalization and standardization", as well as the cry for building houses economically, deals only with fragmentary problems which are certainly important but which possess true significance only when related to an appropriate degree. Besides, or rather above this, there is the problem of space, the creation of a new house. This is a problem of the mind which can only be solved by creative force and not by calculation and organization. Therefore I have abstained from presenting any directives and have restricted myself to choosing collaborators from whose work one might expect interesting contributions toward (solving) the problem of the new house.'1 The Weissenhofsiedlung was the earliest and perhaps the finest achievement of Functionalist architecture (since 1930 called the International Style because the multinational architects showed a profound similarity in their form-expression). As a former leader of the Berlin G-group and having againbecome the main figure in the Berlin‘Ring'of architects, probably because he professed not to be interested in any style, Mies van der Rohe visiblv focused attention upon the International Style. Both the statement quoted above and his reference to the Weissenhofsiedlung as an ‘experiment' in the same article, contradict the views he expressed in 1923. Then architecture was seen as the sum of concrete, iron and glass, answering the rational demands of organization, clearness and economy and rejecting any ‘speculation (the experiment) or the ‘formalism' of a will to style. Actually, Mies van der Rohe had always been attracted to ideas first presented by Van Doesburg in the architectural models of De Stijl, in his lectures and writings, and in the influential third De Stijl manifesto ‘Towards a Newly Shaped World' (1921), which stressed the creative aspect of artistic activity. From its earliest formulation De Stijl architecture had rejected completely the characteristic Functionalist feature of demonstrating visibly the structure of the building, called a bare, anatomical approach by Van Doesburg in ‘The New Aesthetics and its Realization’in 1922. The passage quoted above by Mies van der Rohe may be compared with profit to an introductory paragraph of the Van Doesburg article which states, ‘Neither does the placing side by side or on top of each other of boxes or cells of a predetermined standard type connote plastic architecture...' and 'the (seemingly) economic organization of space found in standardized town-planning actually stands in the way of the progress of plastic architecture'.² In the following year, 1928, De Stijl carried some reproductions of works by Mies van der Rohe.³ Their presence in De Stijl indicates that Van Doesburg realized the change which had taken place in Mies van der Rohe's aesthetic ideas. Yet, as a consequence of his reaction to the upsurge of Functionalism at this time Van Doesburg emphasized the importance of painting in an article published in September, ‘Ön the Relationship of Plastic Form in Painting and Architecture'.4 Nevertheless, his remarks on the Weissenhofsiedlung in an article of his series ‘The Renovation of Architecture in Other Countries', published in Bouwbedrijf, leave no doubt about how Van Doesburg truly felt about the current situation in architecture. The December issue of this periodical carried a Van Doesburg contribution specially dedicated to the exhibition, ‘The House' (the Weissenhofsiedlung) in Stuttgart. He observed that, ‘Due to the initiative of the architect, Mies van der Rohe, by far the strongest personality of the German Constructivist group and the core of the group around G (a magazine which published only five issues), the collective ideal of a demonstrative exhibition of architecture was almost completely realized', and that ‘There are no buildings which reveal so much of the painter and so little of the constructor as those by Le Corbusier.'5 This sentence was, of course, a reference to the fact that, like Van Doesburg, this architect was originally a painter.