## De Stijl's jubilee issue， 1917–27 In the Jubilee issue of De Stijl: 1917–27, prepared in 1927 and published early in 1928, Van Doesburg presented a mixture of feelings. On the one hand, he had every reason to be satisfied, since, despite many misinterpretations, much of what he stood for, in practice as well as in theory, was already exerting its influence. On the other hand, he realized that his enthusiasm for a De Stijl culture of a new plastic expression had led him to neglect his personal interests. It was his conviction – and this is essential for the understanding of his personality and of the collective idea of De Stijl – that there could be neither cultural nor personal achievement without self-denial. In his view De Stijl represented a supra-individual conception of plastic art to be realized collectively by men who have divested themselves of their individualism, but not their individuality. However, it proved difficult to bring principle and practice into harmony. The article in this Jubilee issue, Dates and Facts (Concerning the Development of De Stijl's Influence Abroad) which Speak for Themselves'.1 must be read with care regarding several dates. Presenting a survey of De Stijl, Van Doesburg himself acknowledged that these dates needed to be checked, since he wrote the article in the Vosges, without having at his disposal all the documents in his studio in Paris. The Jubilee issue contains contributions by Van 't Hoff, Huszar, Kok, Mondrian, Oud, Van Leusden, Rietveld, Vantongerloo, Wils, Arp, Ball, Brancusi, Burchartz, Domela, Van Eesteren, Graeff, Kiesler, Röhl and Vordemberge Gildewart. All were represented either with photographs or with texts, the latter in most cases especially written for the occasion. Van Doesburg, however, did not obtain a recently written contribution from Mondrian. Instead Mondrian wrote the following note, dated 4 December 1927: ‘Dear Van Doesburg, After your authoritative improvement (?) of Neoplasticism any collaboration has become impossible. I regret being unable to prevent any reproduction of my articles and photos in the present De Stijl. For the rest, I do not feel any rancour either, Piet Mondrian.'² In view of the differences, this reaction need cause no surprise. The Jubilee issue included a Neo-plastic design for a house interior by Del Marle, made at Wimereux in 1927, and a theatre design by Kiesler from 1925. Theories related to Van Doesburg's were condensed in a series of maxims by Kiesler who called for ‘A system of tension in free space. The change of space in urbanism. No foundations, no walls. The detachment from the earth, the suppression of the static axis. By creating new possibilities for life, a new society will develop.3 A concern with the law of gravity was fundamental to the thinking of both Kiesler and Van Doesburg. Kiesler's Elementarist construction, which was to become an important model for much modern design, especially in relation to methods of public display, was directed towards creating an architecture which seemed to hover in space. Like Van Doesburg's model for a studio house, Kiesler's design was equally indebted to Cubism. For both men the static (Newtonian) world order based on the law of gravity was superseded by the concept of matter in motion. However, their struggle against the law of gravity and static forms did not necessarily imply that the two men sought to produce dynamic works in which the gravitational centre had been lost. Although Kiesler had suppressed the static axis in his constructions, he did not precipitously eliminate all sense of a gravitational centre. Only in some of Van Doesburg's Elementarist paintings did this happen, and not in his four-dimensional Neo-plastic architecture, which always maintained its sense of gravitational centre. Where he did abandon'gravitation in his Elementarist painting, this was because Van Doesburg believed life was a ‘perpetual transformation', accepting its chaos' and rejecting its ‘intervals'. In some Elementarist paintings (e.g. Counter-composition XVI, 1925, p. 152) the space-time continuum can become the visual expression of a continuous flow, of an endless infinite. A series of photographs (pp. 65–8) in the Jubileee issue was intended to demonstrate the influence of De Stijl on architecture by Mallet-Stevens, Malevich, Le Corbusier and Gropius.