## Against problem art An answer to the question of whether or not the new art must serve the community A form of art which is directed towards one specific social class does not exist. If such art existed, it would be of no relevance to life. I ask those who wish to produce proletarian art,‘What is proletarian art? Is it an art produced by proletarians? Or is it art which serves proletarians and aims to stir proletarian (revolutionary) instincts?' An art produced by proletarians does not exist because the proletarian, in creating art, ceases to be a proletarian and becomes an artist instead. The artist is neither proletarian nor bourgeois, and his creations belong neither to the proletarian class nor to the bourgeoisie. They belong to everybody. Art is an activity of the human spirit and is dedicated to the aim of liberating man from the chaos of life, from tragedy. Art is free to choose its own means: however, it is tied to its own laws but nothing but its own laws. As soon as a human effort becomes a work of art, it is superior to any class designation such as proletarian or bourgeois. A form of art, however, which serves only proletarians - apart from the fact that bourgeois taste is reflected among proletarians - would be a very limited form, as would be specifically bourgeois art. Such art would by no means represent a universal form of art derived from universal feelings, but would be based upon limited personal, social, temporal and local concepts. If, on the other hand, art purposely fortifies proletarian instincts, it is using the same means as ecclesiastical and nationalistic art. Painting Trotsky at the head of the Red Guards or Napoleon at the head of the Imperial Guards is one and the same thing, however banal the former scene appears to be. When the painting is considered as a work of art, it is of no importance whatsoever whether proletarian or patriotic feelings are evoked. From the artistic point of view both feelings are illusory. The task of art is to strengthen, by reference to means peculiar to itself, the creative forces of mankind. Its concern is for the maturity of man, not his proletarian or bourgeois status. Only mediocre talents, who lack a deeper sensitivity and therefore possess no larger scope, will produce such a thing as proletarian art (that means politics in painting). The true artist is inspired by life and not by any special aspect of social organization. Art, as we wish it to be, is neither proletarian, nor bourgeois. It produces forces which possess enough strength to influence civilization as a whole but which are not themselves influenced by social circumstances. Proletarians represent a social status which should liquidate itself. The bourgeoisie also represents a social status which should be abandoned. Precisely because proletarians, in proclaiming their so-called Proletarian Culture', are imitating bourgeois culture, they are the very people who unknowingly sustain the present degenerate civilization. This is to the detriment of art and also of civilization. It is the proletarian's attachment to old, obsolete forms of expression and his incomprehensible, absurd dislike of modern art which preserve that with which his programme is at war – bourgeois taste in art and bourgeois civilization. This is why sentimentality and romantic vagueness, despite the strongest efforts by radical artists to destroy such qualities, continue to exist and are even cultivated anew. The idea of renovating art in and through Communism is an error. Communism already is as much a bourgeois affair as parliamentary Socialism; both constitute Capitalism in another form. The bourgeoisie is using the institutions of Communism as a means of renovating its own degenerate civilization (Russia). Thus the so-called proletarian' artist is struggling neither on behalf of art nor on behalf of a new way of life but – without knowing or wishing this – on behalf of the bourgeoisie. Each ‘proletarian' work of art is nothing but a poster dedicated to some (future) bourgeoisie. We modern artists, however, are preparing the monumental works of art which are far superior to all posters whether they be made in order to advertise champagne, Dada or Communist dictatorship. The Hague, 1923 De Stijl vol. vı 1, April 1923, pp. 17–19