## Terminology According to Marinetti it would be better to replace the term ‘counter-composition" with ‘anti-static painting'. However, his term could also be applied to architecture since architecture likewise can manifest an antistatic character, if optically conceived, with new materials and new construction methods (for example, construction based on tension). That which belongs in essence to painting only seemingly belongs in architecture. Whatever construction is used. matter remains subject to the force of gravity. It makes no essential difference whether architecture uses load-and-carry construction, that based on tension or no construction at all (one thinks of the future possibilities provided by light skeletons in reinforced concrete and of modern methods of synthesizing which make a chemical architecture possible). We operate within a kind of‘constellation of contrasts' in order to determine the precise relationship of man to the universe. Man controls the natural characteristics of matter through the mechanical production methods of bending, pressing, twisting, rolling and flattening. Modern technology transforms matter, denaturalizes it. The forms thus created completely lack the decorativeness of antique forms. Our own period's style is largely based on this de- or, rather, transnaturalization. The term‘Neo-Plasticism'(new plastic expression) unfortunately suggested a new plasticity in the sense of tangible threedimensional sculpture.‘Plastic', as understood since its first use in my essay,‘The New Movement in Painting' (published in the periodical, De Beweging, 1916), meant the opposite of ‘picturesque' and representational and, later on in De Stijl, stood for an immediate, elementary expression of aesthetic relationships. Consequently, it is a term which does not bear the Latin meaning of 'plastic'. I have replaced it by an all-embracing, more universal expression: Elementarism. In addition, elementarism is real instead of abstract. The use of the term abstract also caused much misunderstanding. This is easily explained, if one adopts the point of view set forth in the present article. As used in connection with visual methods of expression, the term ‘abstract' is extremely relative.‘To abstract' something implies one of those mental activities (in contrast to emotional spontaneity) through which certain (aesthetic) values are isolated from the world of reality. However, when such values were realized visually and applied as purely constructive means, they became real. Thus the abstract was transformed into the real, thereby illustrating the relativity of the former term. Hence, the term‘abstract-real' (Mondrian) was a fortunate invention, although in reference to a new orientation. the term ‘real' is sufficient. The period of abstraction is at an end. Is not an elementary painting, which is to say a certain composition of plane-linear colours, organic in itself, more concrete than a similar composition which is noņetheless veiled by the illusion of natural-organic form? Indeed. this instantaneously static. rigid composition, which is isolated within the four boundaries of the plane, is more abstract than the organic form which is composed of realistic colours in a so-called ‘abstract' painting. In fact, abstraction is precisely that which takes place within the boundaries of individual thought. An unfolded newspaper is a manifestation of utter abstraction. since its content becomes real if a man bends over it in order to absorb and to translate the variety of events cinematographically and with tremendous velocity. The newspaper is real onlv if seen as a division of black and white. To the printer, a newspaper represents a reality completely different from the readers'. Abstract and real are relative, if not arbitrary, terms. There is no doubt, however, that an increasing desire for visual reality has caused the tremendously increased popularity of the cinema, illustrated newspapers (one is reminded of the growing popularity of magazines), photography and so forth. This desire for visual reality is part and parcel of the style of our times. The printer's block represents as real a means of communication as does the train. We already enjoy a plastic, film-technical reign over space and time, and we are not far from achieving a chemical and radiomechanic elimination of the remaining dependence upon nature. V In order to achieve a new orientation in art, it is absolutely necessary to acknowledge this increasing need for reality. It has developed from our having an isolated abstract religious culture no longer suited to our emotional life. The separation of religion from politics, of art from religion, of architecture from decoration and of politics from economics transpired during distinct, separate phases of this development. This need for reality also left traces for many decades in the development of both art and architecture. Whenever they were kept separate, pure construction and pure art, permitted a better opportunity for achievement in architecture. On the one hand. architecture had to become detached from the superabundances of earlier art forms, ‘to abstract' in order to become independent. On the other hand, painting liberated itself from architecture. from the anecdotal, illusionist and classic notions of composition. Orthogonal composition, which neutralized the extreme tension between the horizontal and the vertical, retained a certain similarity to static (carry-and-load) architecture, since both retained vestiges of conservative composition. Counter- (or anti-static) composition has completely detached itself from this similarity. Its contrasting relationship to architecture can be compared (on another level) to the relationship of contrast between a white, planar-linear architecture and the grey curvilinearity of nature. Élementarism has truly liberated painting from all convention. A quick review of the historical development of composition which begins with pure classicism, will convince us of this.