## N ELEMENTARY (ANTI-STATIC) COUNTER-COMPOSITION This type adds a new, oblique dimension to orthogonal, eccentric composition. Thus it eliminates the tension of the horizontal and the vertical in a realistic manner. It introduces oblique and discordant planes which are opposed to gravitation and architecturalstatic structure. In counter-composition the equilibrium within the place of the canvas plays a less important role. Each plane is related to eccentric space, and the construction must be regarded as a phenomenon of tension rather than a phenomenon of planar relationships. This produces a larger variety of new possibilities for plastic expression. Apart from orthogonal and oblique constructions and their combination, simultaneous constructions can be produced as well. Colour is introduced as an independent energy. V Elementarism acknowledges Time as an element in modern plastic expression. Thus it offers new possibilities to film, plastic art and theatre. It is here that the synoptical effect achieves fundamental significance (‘Synoptical' represents the simultaneous, optical combination of various parts which belong to a whole). Elementarism represents a quite universal method of plastic expression and production. It is opposed both to compromise and to any dogmatic one-sidedness. It can be considered the most vital manner of expressing the modern spirit. It is the product of Neoplasticism as well as of a new orientation in the fields of modern science and technology. Elementarism comprises all expression in its most essential and elementary appearance. It demands that everything be determined and acknowledges the pure elementary existence of all separate phenomena: nature as nature. culture as culture. art as art and architecture as a functional, practical method of construction. All earlier systems thought themselves able to neutralize the hostility between organic nature and human intelligence through keeping them either alternate or in balanced relationship. Elementarism rejects these systems and, because of the prevailing spiritual and social chaos, is confirmed in its basic principle concerning the complete difference in structure between the state of nature and the individual spiritual man. It supports any destructive force which contributes towards true liberation and the ascent to a higher level of human spiritual activity. Because of its new orientation towards former efforts to renovate life and art (which include Futurism, Cubism, Expressionism, Dadaism, Neo-plasticism and so on) Elementarism contains all truly modern elements (which one-sidedly have often been ignored!). Therefore. Elementarism mav be viewed as a synthesis of the new plastic notions of our times. The ‘isms' of recent decades went bankrupt largely through one-sided, dogmatic limitations or compromises and due to chauvinism. They no longer possess any value or vitality that could lead to renovation. Elementarism is the equivalent of relativity, of the latest discoveries about matter and of phenomenological definitions concerning the unlimited, yet latent, omnipotence of human intelligence. In contrast to religious dogmatists, the Elementarist considers life only as ‘a perpetual transformation', whereas the creative artist represents a phenomenon in contrast with this perpetual transformation. VI The subject matter of countercomposition. Due to the increasing need for an understanding of reality, which expresses itself in the gradual suppression of all illusionistic means and transitional phases of approach, the independence of matter becomes increasingly apparent. The same observation applies to colour. Elementarism rejects the colour arrangement which stems from illusionism. Each colour - as pigmentation or as matter - possesses an independent energy, an elementary force. This applies to the three most positive colours - yellow, blue and red - and to their negative equivalents – white, black and grey. Neither Cubism nor Neo-plasticism could do without‘value'. Admittedly Cubism (Picasso), Futurism (Carrà) and Merz' (Schwitters) each made an effort to use novel materials (such as newsprint, coloured matter, tin, metal and glass) in order to master the determination of value or, rather, its material independence. Post-Cubist styles of expression ignored their intuitive approach. Only by Neo-plasticism were the abstract approach and the expression of relationship consistently promoted. In addition to using novel materials, Cubism both maintained the values obtained through colour theory and also used letters, figures and monotonously dotted planes. Elementarism rejects the use of these substitutions, while admitting their great value. It juxtaposes the positive colours with the negative white, black and grey, and, whenever these do not suffice. it adds elementary variations of colour or line (see the diamonds in my Counter-composition XV, 1925, illustrated in De Stijl, issue 73–74). Very elementary earthen colours and ochres can also serve as‘variations'. In my now-completed ‘Theory of Plastic Colour', I have dealt in a very direct way with colour as a means of creating energy and also discord, contrast and variation. VI Counter-plastic form: it is much more difficult to construct in an elementary manner through plastic form conceived as an independent, plastic expression, which is to say, in terms of painting, poetry and so forth. For instance, although on the one hand orthogonal plastic form is perhaps purer and more consistent than Cubist or Ôrphist plastic form, on the other hand it accentuates the force of gravitation in nature more than did its predecessors (which might be the explanation for its tragic default). It is understandable whv - in order to avoid this either through the use of moving figures or more elementary forms - there arose a need for dynamics, which is another way of saying that a desire was born to create a form which contrasts with the orthogonal axis of static form. Elementarism is preparing for the realization of elementary counter-plastic form, and we must first destroy the use of a static axis in contempt for the Euclidean view of life (which relates to the static point). With the use of a relief medium, this goal should prove easily attainable; however, this relief medium calls to mind too specifically an ornamental plate and, by extension, the art of Russia. (The Russian sculptor, Tatlin, called his bent-metal reliefs‘counter-reliefs'. They nevertheless possessed no quality of counter-plastic form, since Tatlin, who was a romanticist, understood neither the problem of modern plastic form nor that of architecture. This is sufficiently proved by his spiral, baroque monument, which by reason of the illogical composition of its spaces and elements, is actually symbolic!(Russian muddle-headedness and snobbish braggadocio aimed at impressing teenagers!). Several important works in the figurative manner already point the way (one thinks of several good sculptures by Archipenko, such as The Dance, which was reproduced in De Stijl, vol. I, and his Gondolier, as well as many works by Boccioni, Brancusi and Laurens) but, from an Elementarist's point of view. hardly anything exists which can be designated as an example of counter-plastic form. Optical illusion seems to play a dangerous and inevitable role in relation to this problem. Rome, July 1926 De Stijl, series xı11, 1 75–6, 1926, pp. 35–43