## The other face. To be (I. K. Bonset) He who is above cannot be below Not to show one's colours is to be like flotsam not to be consistent (to be oneself) is not being inconsistent but never being true hate all flag-heroism but incite to being oneself suffering the consequences of being: to be hard to be cold to be cruel To kill to hurt to disturb tranquillity to distort harmony from truly being that is heroic being to be oneself is being neither under bond nor borrowed nor sold nor hired to be means to be spiritually free De Stijl vol. xı11, 75–6, 1926, p. 64 abstract, sur-humanistic novel ## preface literature possesses its own reality, its own system.‘reality' measures in seconds and millimetres; the new literature does not acknowledge such reality. It contains neither sense' nor purpose. its contents are words. its medium is the method of writing. this new method of writing, now applied for the first time to the dutch language, is ‘automatic'; it is intuitive. in it a logical coherence is not to be found. each suggestion of continuation and coherence has been terminated as in a fraction of a second. in this automatic procedure the entire field of inner presentation is laid bare. the skeleton becomes visible. the dream is a banal form of literature. the dream, however, possesses one advantage if compared with literary forms of poetry. it excludes reason. through this accomplishment it acts upon the ‘reader'. we like dreaming because it makes us feel free (we even wish dreams to be ‘lascivious'). from the slavery of existence we flee into the dream. the new literature is at its best if like this. the new poetry was born during the reign of reason, as a relaxation which is opposed to reason. keep your ridiculous reason only in order to check the bills of your tailor. ## chapter one after the nocturnal eclipses of the sun had vanished and I had experienced the pleasant sensation of dying, it became clear to me – for the first time in my life – how dependent was the fabric of my being. two unequal parts, which showed no similarity whatsoever to one another. each part invariably wished to do very opposite things. despite this relative hostility in disposition, struċture, and sex, my life had expressed itself in an undeniable balance. at the moment of my death, time had solved itself through matter and the nothingness'of which my double-being largely consisted had assumed such enormous proportions that entirely different dimensions were required in order to contain it. and for the first time, through glazed eyes my awakened consciousness perceived the tremendous size of this pregnant body which had been created from nothingness; the entire mechanism of my being was dismounted screw by screw and bolt by bolt. each part was cleaned and polished; the whole was carefully and thoroughly examined under the microscope and then placed beneath immaculate glass hemispheres, clean and shining, as if I must perceive the complicated organization of a world unfolding before my petrified eyes. everything which gained existence within the two of us – coloured skeletons in swallow-tail coats. discoloured mummies, perfumed or smelling of putrefaction, or adorned with scarlet tin flowers, mummies transparent as gelatine, elastic as tape-worms and nourished by luxurious vegetation, brains silvery, ulcerated and sometimes decorated with burning chalk candles or mummies swathed in lace and silk sheets, decorated with flowers of blood – all fell apart in front of the frozen windows of my early consciousness and melted and washed away beyond recall in the immense abyss of nothingness. this is not the place to disturb and to deplore pleasant things', I was thinking at the moment when the razor sharp steel of an invisible guillotine split me into two unbalanced parts, preventing me from expressing an accumulation of contempt and horror for a world justified only thanks to its brothels. De Stijl, series x111, 77, 1926, pp. 66–7