## Photography as reportage The ability of photography to provide a historical record and define human history for forthcoming generations was dramatically proven by the prosperous New York studio photographer Mathew Brady. When the American Civil War began, Brady set out in a white duster and straw hat carrying a handwritten card from Abraham Lincoln reading “Pass Brady—A. Lincoln.” During the war Brady invested a \$100,000 fortune to send a score of his photographic assistants, including Alexander Gardner (1821-82) and Timothy H. O’Sullivan (c. 1840-82), to document the American Civil War. From Brady’s photography wagons, called “Whatsits” by the Union troops, a great national trauma was etched forever in the collective memory. Brady’s photographic documentation had a profound impact upon the public’s romantic ideal of war (Fig. 9-43). Battlefield photographs joined artist’s sketches as reference materials for wood-engraved magazine and newspaper illustrations. Additionally, photographers would soon produce entire books featuring scenes from the Civil War. After the Civil War, photography became an important documentary and communications tool in the exploration of new territory and the opening of the American West. Photographers, including O’Sullivan, were hired by the federal government to accompany expeditions into the unexplored western territories (Fig. 9-44). From 1867 until 1869, O’Sullivan accompanied the Geological Exploration of the Fortieth Parallel, beginning in western Nevada. He returned to the East and translated his work into illustrations for reproduction. These images of the West inspired the great migratory wanderlust that eventually conquered all of North America. In addition to providing images of exotic, far-off scenes, technical innovations in photography helped popularize the medium. Stereoscopic images, viewed through a stereoscope, were created by using a special camera with two lenses that attempted to recreate human vision. The resulting stereocards (Fig. 9-45) featured two images that gave the effect of three-dimensional depth on a twodimensional card. A popular Victorian parlor activity, stereocards became highly collectible, especially in the United States. An adventurous photographer, Eadweard Muybridge (1830-1904) lived in San Francisco and photographed Yosemite, Alaska, and Central America. Leland Stanford, a former governor of California and the president of the Central Pacific Railroad, commissioned Muybridge to document his belief that a galloping horse lifted all four feet off the ground simultaneously; a twenty-fivethousand-dollar wager rested on the outcome. While working on the problem, Muybridge became interested in photographing a horse’s stride at regular intervals. Success came in 1877 and 1878, when a battery of twenty-four cameras—facing an intense white background in the dazzling California sunlight —was equipped with rapid drop shutters that were slammed down by springs and rubber bands as a galloping horse broke threads attached to the shutters. The resulting sequence of photographs arrested the horse’s movement in time and space, and Stanford, a breeder and racer of trotters, won the bet (Fig. 9- 46). The development of motion-picture photography, the kinetic medium of changing light passing through a series of still photographs joined together by the human eye through the persistence of vision, was the logical extension of Muybridge’s innovation. Nineteenth-century inventors like Talbot, documentalists like Brady, and visual poets like Cameron had a significant collective impact upon graphic design. By the arrival of the twentieth century, photography was becoming an increasingly important reproduction tool. New technologies radically altered existing ones, and both printing techniques and illustration changed dramatically. As photomechanical reproduction replaced handmade plates, illustrators gained a new freedom of expression. Photography gradually monopolized factual documentation and pushed the illustrator toward fantasy and fiction. The textural and tonal properties of the halftone image changed the visual appearance of the printed page. 