## The development of lithography Lithography was invented by Bavarian author Aloys Senefelder (1771-1834) between 1796 and 1798. Senefelder was seeking a cheap way to print his own dramatic works by experimenting with etched stones and metal reliefs. He eventually arrived at the idea that a stone could be etched away around greasepencil writing and made into a relief printing plate. Senefelder named his process lithography (from the Greek lithos, “stone,” and graphein, “to write”). After further experimentation he published his Vollständiges Lehrbuch der Steindruckerey (Complete Textbook of Lithography) in 1818, and this was followed a year later by an English translation, A Complete Course of Lithography (Fig. 9-49). In lithographic printing the image to be printed is neither raised, as in relief printing, nor incised, as in intaglio printing. Rather, it is formed on the flat plane of the printing surface. Printing from a flat surface is called planographic printing. Lithography is based on the simple chemical principle that oil and water do not mix. An image is drawn on a flat stone surface with oil-based crayon, pen, or pencil. Water is spread over the stone to moisten all areas except the oil-based image, which repels the water. Then an oil-based ink is rolled over the stone, adhering to the image but not to the wet areas of the stone. A sheet of paper is placed over the image and a printing press is used to transfer the inked image onto the paper. In the early 1800s Senefelder began experimenting with multicolor lithography, and in his 1819 book he predicted that one day this process would be perfected to allow reproduction of paintings. Since the time of medieval block books, applying color to printed images by hand had been a slow and costly process. German printers spearheaded color lithography, and the French printer Godefroy Engelmann (1788-1839) patented a process named chromolithographie in 1837. After analyzing the colors contained within the original image, the printer separated them into a series of printing plates and printed these component colors, one by one. Frequently, one printing plate (often black) established the image after separate plates printed other colors. The arrival of color printing would soon have vast social and economic ramifications. 