## A moment in time is preserved as a transient human event. 39 x 27 cm Ando Hiroshige (1797-1858) was the last great master of the Japanese woodcut. A rival of Hokusai, he inspired the European impressionists with his brilliant spatial composition and ability to capture the transient moments of the landscape. In the series Fifty-Three Stages of the Tokaido, Hiroshige illustrated the fifty-three way stations (Fig. 11-5) along the Eastern Sea Road from Edo to Kyoto, capturing subtle nuances of light, atmosphere, and season. He not only observed and captured the poetic splendor of nature but related it to the lives of ordinary people as well. This is seen in the brilliant spatial compositions of the series Famous Places in Edo: A Hundred Views (Fig. 11-6). Hiroshige’s death during an 1858 cholera epidemic came as the collision of Asian and European cultures was about to have a major influence on Western art and design. The treaties resulting from American commodore Matthew C. Perry’s naval expeditions to Japan, beginning in 1853, led to the collapse of Japan’s traditional isolationist policies and opened trade with the West. A revolution overthrew the last shogun in 1867 and restored supreme power to the Meiji emperor the following year. Japan’s leaders began building a modern nation with economic and military similarities to Western nations. A centralized constitutional government, industrialization, and a strong military were developed. The late nineteenth-century Western mania for all things Japanese is called Japonisme. Japanese artifacts streamed into Europe, and several books on Japanese art and ornament were published during the 1880s. Although ukiyo-e practitioners were considered mere artisans in Japan, they captivated European artists, who drew inspiration from the calligraphic line drawing, abstraction and simplification of natural appearances, flat color and silhouettes, unconventional use of bold black shapes, and decorative patterns. Subjects often became emblematic symbols, reduced to graphic interpretations conveying their essence. Landscape and interior environments were frequently presented as suggestive impressions rather than detailed depictions. Too often, ukiyo-e has been venerated for its catalytic impact on Western art rather than for its independent major achievements in graphic illustration and design. 