## Surrealism With roots in Dada and in a group of young French writers and poets associated with the journal Littérature, surrealism entered the Paris scene in 1924, searching for the “more real than real world behind the real”—the world of intuition, dreams, and the unconscious realm explored by Freud. Apollinaire had used the expression “surreal drama” in reviewing a play in 1917. The poet André Breton, the founder of surrealism, imbued the word with all the magic of dreams, the spirit of rebellion, and the mysteries of the subconscious in his 1924 Surrealist Manifesto: “Surrealism, noun, masc. pure psychic automatism by which it is intended to express, either verbally or in writing, the true function of thought. Thought dictated in the absence of all control exerted by reason, all aesthetic or moral preoccupations.” Tristan Tzara came from Zurich to join Breton, Louis Aragon (1897-1982), and Paul Éluard (1895-1952). He stirred the group on toward scandal and rebellion. These young poets rejected the rationalism and formal conventions dominating postwar creative activities in Paris. They sought ways to make new truths, to reveal the language of the soul. Surrealism (or “super reality”) was not a style or a matter of aesthetics; rather, it was a way of thinking and knowing, a way of feeling, and a way of life. Where Dada had been negative, destructive, and perpetually exhibitionist, surrealism professed a poetic faith in man and his spirit. Humanity could be liberated from social and moral conventions. Intuition and feeling could be freed. The writers experimented with stream-ofconsciousness writing, or automatism, to seek an uninhibited truth. The impact of the surrealist poets and writers has been limited to French literary and scholarly circles; it was through the movement’s painters that surrealism affected society and visual communications. While surrealists often created works so personal that communication became impossible, they also produced images whose emotional content, symbolism, or fantasy triggered a collective, universal response in large numbers of people. Breton and his friends speculated about the possibility of surreal painting. They discovered the work of Giorgio de Chirico (1888-1978) and declared him the first surrealist painter. A member of the short-lived Italian metaphysical school of painting, de Chirico painted hauntingly empty spaces that possess an intense melancholy (Fig. 13- 44). Vacant buildings, harsh shadows, deeply tilted perspective, and enigmatic images convey emotions far removed from ordinary experience. Of the large number of artists who joined the surrealist movement, several significantly influenced visual communications, with a major impact on photography and illustration. Max Ernst (1891-1965), a restless German Dadaist, used a number of techniques that have been adopted in graphic communications. Fascinated by the wood engravings in nineteenth-century novels and catalogues, Ernst reinvented them by using collage techniques to create strange juxtapositions (Fig. 13-45). These surreal collages have had a strong influence on illustration. His frottage technique involved using rubbings to compose directly on paper. As he looked at his rubbings, Ernst’s imagination invented images in them, much as one sees images in cloud formations. Then he developed the rubbings into fantastic pictures. Decalcomania, Ernst’s process of transferring images from printed matter to a drawing or painting, enabled him to incorporate a variety of images into his work in unexpected ways. This technique has been used extensively in illustration, painting, and printmaking. Figurative surrealist painters have been called “naturalists of the imaginary” by French art historians. Space, color, perspective, and figures are rendered in careful naturalism, but the image is an unreal dreamscape. The Belgian surrealist René Magritte (1898-1967) maintained a poetic dialogue between reality and illusion, truth and fiction (Fig. 13-46). His prolific body of images inspired many visual communications. The theatrical Spanish painter Salvador Dalí (1904-89) influenced graphic design in two ways. His deep perspectives in his prints and paintings inspired designers to bring vast depth to the flat, printed page and have been frequently imitated in posters and editorial images (Fig. 13-47). Another group of surrealist painters, the emblematics, worked with a purely visual vocabulary. Visual automatism (intuitive stream-of-consciousness drawing and calligraphy) was used to create spontaneous expressions of inner life in the work of Joan Miró (1893-1983) and Jean Arp. Miró explored a process of metamorphosis through which he intuitively developed his motifs into cryptic, organic shapes (Fig. 13-48). As early as 1916, Arp explored chance and unplanned harmonies in works such as Squares Arranged According to the Laws of Chance. The biomorphic forms and open composition of these artists were incorporated into product and graphic design, particularly during the 1950s. Surrealism’s impact on graphic design has been diverse. It provided a poetic example of the liberation of the human spirit. It pioneered new techniques and demonstrated how fantasy and intuition could be expressed in visual terms. Unfortunately, the ideas and images of surrealism have been exploited and trivialized frequently in the mass media. 