## De Stijl The De Stijl movement was launched in the Netherlands in the late summer of 1917. Its founder and guiding spirit, Théo van Doesburg (born C. E. M. Küpper; 1883-1931), was joined by painters Piet Mondrian (1872-1944), Bart Anthony van der Leck (1876-1958), and Vilmos Huszár (1884-1931), the architect Jacobus Johannes Pieter Oud (1890-1963), and others. Working in an abstract geometric style, De Stijl artists sought universal laws of balance and harmony for art, which could then be a prototype for a new social order. Mondrian’s paintings are the wellspring from which De Stijl’s philosophy and visual forms developed. By 1911 Mondrian had moved from traditional landscape painting to a symbolic style influenced by Van Gogh that expressed the forces of nature. It was then that he first saw cubist paintings. In early 1912 he relocated to Paris and began to introduce the vocabulary of cubism into his work. Over the next few years, Mondrian purged his art of all representative elements and moved cubism toward a pure, geometric abstraction. When war broke out in 1914, Mondrian was in Holland, and he remained there during the war. The philosopher M. H. J. Schoenmakers influenced Mondrian’s thinking. Schoenmakers defined the horizontal and the vertical as the two fundamental opposites shaping our world, and called red, yellow, and blue the three principal colors. Mondrian began to paint purely abstract paintings composed of horizontal and vertical lines. He believed the cubists had not accepted the logical consequences of their discoveries; this was the evolution of abstraction toward its ultimate goal, the expression of pure reality. Mondrian believed true reality in visual art “is attained through dynamic movement in equilibrium … established through the balance of unequal but equivalent oppositions. The clarification of equilibrium through plastic art is of great importance for humanity…. It is the task of art to express a clear vision of reality.” For a time in the late 1910s, paintings and designs by Mondrian, Van der Leck, and Van Doesburg were quite similar. They reduced their visual vocabulary to the use of primary colors (red, yellow, and blue) with neutrals (black, gray, and white), straight horizontal and vertical lines, and flat planes limited to rectangles and squares. With their prescribed visual vocabulary, De Stijl artists sought an expression of the mathematical structure of the universe and the universal harmony of nature. They were deeply concerned with the spiritual and intellectual climate of their time and wished to express the “general consciousness of their age.” They believed the war was expunging an obsolete age, and that science, technology, and political developments would usher in a new era of objectivity and collectivism. This attitude was widespread during World War I, for many European philosophers, scientists, and artists believed prewar values had lost their relevance. De Stijl sought the universal laws that govern visible reality but are hidden by the outward appearance of things. Scientific theory, mechanical production, and the rhythms of the modern city formed from these universal 