## Typeface design in the first half of the twentieth century The passion for the new typography created a spate of sans-serif styles during the 1920s. An earlier sans serif, Johnston’s Railway Type (see Fig. 12-42), inspired the Gill Sans series (Fig. 16-37), which was designed by Edward Johnston’s friend and former student Eric Gill (1882-1940) and issued between 1928 and 1930. This type family, which eventually included fourteen styles, does not have an extremely mechanical appearance because its proportions stem from the roman tradition. An architectural apprentice dropout tutored by Johnston at the turn of the century, Eric Gill was a complex and colorful figure who defies categorization in the history of graphic design. His activities encompassed stonemasonry, inscription carving for monuments, sculpture, wood engraving, typeface design, lettering, book design, and extensive writing. His 1913 conversion to Catholicism intensified his belief that work has spiritual value and that the artist and craftsman serve a human need for beauty and dignity. Around 1925, in spite of his earlier polemics against machine manufacture, he was persuaded by Stanley Morison (1889-1967) of the Monotype Corporation to accept the challenge of type design. His first type, Perpetua, is an antique roman face inspired by the inscription on Trajan’s column but subtly redesigned to accommodate the needs of typecasting and printing. Gill’s embrace of historical influences—including the Trajan capitals, letters used in medieval manuscripts and the incunabula, Baskerville, and Caslon—threatened to make him a historicist, but his highly original vision and opinions enabled him to transcend these influences in much of his work. His work for The Four Gospels (Fig. 16- 38) demonstrates this synthesis of old and new. The Golden Cockerel type that Gill created for this book is a revitalized roman incorporating both Old Style and Transitional qualities. His woodcut illustrations have an archaic, almost medieval quality. However, his total design integration of illustration, capitals, headings, and text into a dynamic whole is strikingly modern. 