## The flight from fascism The rise of fascism in Europe created one of the greatest transnational migrations of intellectual and creative talent in history. Scientists, authors, architects, artists, and designers left Europe for the haven of North America during the late 1930s. Among them were the artists Ernst, Duchamp, and Mondrian. When the Nazis closed the Bauhaus in 1933, faculty, students, and alumni dispersed throughout the world and made modern design a truly international movement. Walter Gropius, Mies van der Rohe, and Marcel Breuer transplanted the functionalist architectural movement to the United States, and Herbert Bayer and Moholy-Nagy brought their innovative approaches to graphic design. Other European graphic designers who came to America and made significant contributions to design include Will Burtin, Jean Carlu, George Giusti, Herbert Matter, and Ladislav Sutnar. Sponsored by the Association of Arts and Industries, Moholy-Nagy arrived in Chicago in 1937 and established the New Bauhaus. This closed after just one year due to inadequate financial support, but Moholy-Nagy managed to open the School of Design in 1939. The primary source of financial support came from Moholy-Nagy himself and other faculty members, many of whom agreed to teach without pay if necessary. Both Carlu and Bayer also found it difficult to find clients who comprehended their work during their first months in America. Burtin (1908-72), recognized as one of Germany’s outstanding designers, fled Germany in 1938 after refusing to work for the Nazi regime. His work combined a graphic clarity and directness with a lucid presentation of the subject matter. The “Design Decade” Architectural Forum cover (Fig. 17-27) demonstrates his ability to bring together structural form and symbolic information in a cohesive whole. The dates, printed on acetate, combine with the architect’s tools to signify design during the preceding decade; shadows become integral forms in the design. Burtin’s keen understanding of science is reflected in designs for the Upjohn pharmaceutical company interpreting such complex subjects as bacteriology (Fig. 17-28). In 1943 Burtin left Upjohn to work on government training manuals, followed by three years as art director of Fortune magazine. In 1948 he became a design consultant for Upjohn and other companies, making a major contribution to the visual interpretation of graphic information. 