## New Swiss sans-serif typefaces The emerging International Typographic Style was exemplified by several new sans-serif type families designed in the 1950s. The geometric sans-serif styles, mathematically constructed with drafting instruments during the 1920s and 1930s, were rejected in favor of more refined designs inspired by nineteenthcentury Akzidenz Grotesk fonts (see Fig. 12-28). In 1954 a young Swiss designer working in Paris, Adrian Frutiger (b. 1928), completed a visually programmed family of twenty-one sans-serif fonts named Univers for the Deberny & Peignot type foundry (Fig. 18-10). The palette of typographic variations—limited to regular, italic, and bold in traditional typography—was expanded sevenfold. Numbers replaced conventional nomenclature. The normal or regular weight with the proper black-and-white relationships for book setting is called Univers 55, and the family ranges from Univers 39 (light/extra condensed) to Univers 83 (expanded/extrabold). Fonts to the left of Univers 55 are expanded; fonts to the right of Univers 55 are condensed. The stroke weights of fonts above Univers 55 are lighter, while stroke weights of fonts below Univers 55 are heavier. Because all twenty-one fonts have the same x-height and ascender and descender lengths, they form a uniform whole that can be used together with complete harmony (Fig. 18-11). The size and weight of the capitals are close to the size and weight of the lowercase characters; therefore, the texture and tone of a Univers text setting is more uniform than that of most earlier typefaces, especially in multilingual publications. Frutiger labored for three years on Univers. To produce the Univers family, Deberny & Peignot invested over two hundred thousand hours of machine engraving, retouching, and final hand-punching to create the thirty-five thousand matrixes needed to produce all twenty-one fonts in the full range of sizes. Univers was unique in being produced for both metal and photo typesetting. In the mid-1950s, Edouard Hoffman (1910-80) of the HAAS type foundry in Switzerland decided that the Akzidenz Grotesk fonts should be refined and upgraded. Hoffman collaborated with Max Miedinger (1910-80), who executed the designs, and their new sans serif, with an even larger x-height than that of Univers, was released as Neue Haas Grotesk. When this design was produced in Germany by the now-defunct D. Stempel AG in 1961, the face was named Helvetica (Fig. 18-12), from Helvetia, the traditional Latin name for Switzerland. Helvetica’s well-defined forms and excellent rhythm of positive and negative shapes made it the most specified typeface internationally during the 1960s and 1970s. However, because different designers in several countries developed Helvetica’s various weights, italics, and widths, the original Helvetica family lacked the cohesiveness of Univers. As digital typesetting became prevalent in the 1980s, versions of the Helvetica family with more systemic compatibility were developed, including Linotype’s 1983 Neue Helvetica with eight weights, each with extended, condensed, and italic versions. 