## Transportation signage symbols Major international events, large airports, and other transportation facilities handling international travelers have commissioned graphic designers to create pictographic signage programs to communicate important information and directions quickly and simply. The development of these sign-and-symbol systems involved considerable time and expense, and near duplication of effort often occurred. In 1974, the United States Department of Transportation commissioned the American Institute of Graphic Arts (AIGA), the nation’s oldest professional graphic design organization, to create a master set of thirtyfour passenger and pedestrian-oriented symbols for use in transportation facilities. The goal was a consistent and interrelated group of symbols for worldwide transportation facilities meant to bridge language barriers and simplify basic messages. The first step was the compilation and inventory of symbol systems developed for individual transportation facilities and international events (Fig. 20-42). A committee of five prominent graphic designers, headed by Thomas H. Geismar, acted as evaluators and advisers on the project. The Department of Transportation provided the AIGA with a list of message areas. Prior solutions to the thirty-four subject areas were evaluated by each member of the advisory committee, and a summary recommendation was prepared to guide the design of the symbol system. Some existing symbols were retained, while in other categories totally new glyphs were developed, with clarity of image their overriding goal. The final set of symbols (Fig. 20-43) was designed and drawn by Roger Cook (b. 1930) and Don Shanosky (b. 1937) of Cook and Shanosky Associates in Princeton, New Jersey. These signs combined overall harmony with a visual consistency of line, shape, weight, and form. This effort represented an important first step toward the goal of unified and effective graphic communications transcending cultural and language barriers in a shrinking world. A 288-page book published by the Department of Transportation provided invaluable information about the design and evaluation process used to arrive at the system. 