## designs (Fig. 21-45). Sister Corita Kent’s (1918-86) artistic expression came of age in the 1960s, and she worked prolifically until the time of her death. She entered the convent of the Immaculate Heart Community of Los Angeles at the age of eighteen and gained notoriety in the 1950s and 1960s with her iconoclastic approach to her spirituality and artistic practice. Kent studied art at Immaculate Heart College and earned a master’s degree in art history at University of Southern California, where she also learned printmaking and serigraphy. Through her work, she promulgated amnesty and social justice. She enjoyed printmaking and other mediums produced in multiples because it allowed her to reach the biggest audiences. Inspired by abstract expressionism’s active and experiential nature, Kent combined childlike forms and saturated colors suggesting a sense of optimism and innocence. She rejected her modernist upbringing, with its tenets of simple form and content relationships, and infused her work with a deeply personal touch. She appropriated signs, literary texts and phrases, and song lyrics from her everyday environment and used these elements in compositions that assumed new meanings (Figs. 21-46 and 21-47). She explored new territories, spreading spiritual teachings through her artwork while developing an iconic and forward-thinking art form. During the 1980s, a conservative decade characterized by growing economic disparity between rich and poor, environmental indifference, and limited social activism, many American posters were produced as decorative objects. Limitededition images of photographs or paintings became posters rather than reproductions because the artist’s name and often a title—frequently letterspaced in elegant, all-capital type—were added. These were sold in specialty shops and department stores. Typical subjects included flowers, highperformance sports cars, and fruit presented against simple backgrounds with exquisite composition and lighting. 